Fresh breath and shining teeth enhance your personality .
Your self-confidence also increases with teeth .
Bacteria stay between our gums and teeth .
They make teeth dirty and breath stinky .
You may keep your teeth clean and breath fresh by the help of some easy tips given here .
Clean your teeth properly .
It takes two to three minutes to clean your teeth properly .
But most of the people give less than one minute for this .
Drink plenty of water .
Bacteria attack fast if the mouth dries up .
With this stink comes from breath .
By drinking plenty of water not only the left-over pieces of food gets cleaned but saliva also gets formed .
Saliva has important role in keeping the mouth clean .
Saliva destroys those bacteria which create stink in breath .
Chew the sugar-free chewing gum .
Saliva is formed by chewing the chewing gum .
Chewing gum helps in keeping the teeth clean .
Sugared chewing gum is not supposed to be good for health .
That is why dentists do not suggest chewing sugared chewing gum .
Get the teeth checked-up regularly .
Get the teeth checked-up with the dentists regularly .
They solve small problems of the teeth easily .
Clean the mouth after meal .
Do clean the mouth every time with water after eating .
The left-over pieces of food is cleaned by it .
Clean the teeth with the mixture of lemon and salt .
Taking a spoon of salt pour three to four drops of lemon juice in that .
Clean the teeth every week with this mixture .
Not only teeth starts shining with this .
But one also gets relief from stinking breath .
If there is health there is everything .
It is not less than a challenge to keep oneself healthy in today 's busy life .
But you can keep yourself healthy by paying attention to your food habits and by bringing a little change in your lifestyle .
Eat less fatty food .
Eat only that food in which there is less fat and more fiber .
Fruits and vegetables have a ratio like this .
We get helped in controlling our weight by taking less fatty and fibered food .
You keep yourself far from many diseases by eating less fatty and fibered food .
Take less salt and alcohol .
Take the least quantity of salt and alcohol to control blood pressure and cholesterol .
Stop smoking .
There is a danger of several diseases including cancer with smoking .
Try your best to quit it .
Exercise daily .
You must include exercise in your daily routine .
You can prevent heart diseases , colon cancer , blood pressure and diabetes like diseases by regular exercise .
Keep doing light physical activities .
Keep doing small physical activities like climbing stairs , gardening , small domestic works or dancing .
These retain the flexibility in the body .
If fever comes continuously you must get it checked up .
Malaria , kalajar , tuberculoses starts with fever .
Summer season has started .
Do not eat stale food and the things being sold at road sides .
Do not feed children fast food , kurkure , ice-cream .
In case of vomiting and loose-motion feed the ORS or mixture of salt and sugar .
Drink pure water as much as you can .
I suffer from fever continuously .
Kalajar , Malaria or high fiver may have happened .
My child is suffering from both diarrhoea and malaria .
First feed the mixture of ORS after this get the child checked-up with a paediatrician .
Fever occurs at an interval of two to three months since two and half to three years .
Not only this . white coat also forms on tongue .
Drink plenty of water and get urine culture done .
What are the primary symptoms of kalajar .
I have light fever for some days .
Get the fever checked up and only after the other essential tests kalajar can be verified .
Fever goes down after taking the tablet of Metacin and again fever increases up to 103 .
X-ray and TC-DC are normal .
Measure the fever every four hours .
If fever is more then 100 give a pill of paracetamol and take suggestions from a medicine specialist doctor .
What is HIV
How does it happens .
State the solutions of prevention .
This is a kind of virus .
Its spread occurs mainly through unprotected sex relation , infected needle , infected blood and from mother to children .
The disease immune capacity of the body keeps on decreasing with this .
What is the identification of bone TB , and what is its treatment .
Pain in the bones , continuous fever , whether it is low or increasing by the evening , deformation of bones along with pain are the symptoms of tuberculosis .
Bones become weak and starts melting .
Paralysis may also attack in this situation .
To test it do digital X-ray MRI take medicine of tuberculosis for a year and consult the specialist doctor .
Keep a shawl necessarily over the body and run the fan to the minimum in the night while sleeping .
If you do not feel comfortable with it take anti-allergic tablet for ten days .
Children are suffering from prickly heat , what to do .
What is the home treatment of diarrhoea .
Put two spoons of sugar and a pinch of salt in a glass of water and boil it .
Does kalajar occur because of sun .
Does its influence increase in summer .
Kalajar is caused by the sting of sand-fly .
Its treatment is available in all the hospitals .
There is a tablet also available for this now .
What should be done when a child suffers from whooping cough .
Administer the DPT vaccine to the child .
Get consulted with a specialist doctor and get the mucus tested for cough .
How much aware are you about the care of your eyes .
Get eyes checked up every six months .
Maintain the glass or contact lens .
Washing eyes regularly .
But along with all this if you pay attention to your food-habits .
not only the vision of your eyes may be better .
but you will also be safe from eye diseases .
The chairperson of the Department of Ophthalmology of Liverpool University Dr . Ian Greerson says .
Common blindness causing diseases like cataract and glaucoma can be prevented by increasing the amount of vitamin-C and omega-3 oils and some special plants in diet .
So let us know how your diet should be to keep eyes healthy .
You should include green vegetables in your diet to keep eyes sharp .
Eating spinach , broccoli , germinated grains may be beneficial in this regard .
There are two important elements like lutein , zeaxanthin which are responsible to keep vision sharp .
This has been testified in the six-year study by the American National Eye Institute that this element saves old people from blindness .
You must eat two or three eggs daily in breakfast .
Bilberry or blackberry anthocyanin saves from blindness or cataract .
It is also found in the research that it strengthens the cell which brings blood and nutritious elements into the eyes .
That is why you can also eat bilberry or blackberry in breakfast or with fruit salad .
There is no better solution but to eat fish for keeping eyes healthy if you are a non-vegetarian .
By eating fish not only your skin , hair , brain remain healthy but eyes also sharpen .
Omega-3 fat found in fish decreases the danger of glaucoma and weak eyes in old age .
Not only this , it saves you from dry eye syndrome .
It is stated in another study that women suffering from ophthalmic problems such as dry eye syndrome can decrease this problem up to 68 percent by eating tuna fish .
The use of dry fruits etcetera in Indian cuisines has been continuing for centuries .
But do you know that all the dry fruits such as almond , cashew nut , walnut , raisins etcetera are also very beneficial for eyes besides being nutritious .
Plenty of vitaminE is found in these , which not only saves from cataract , many kind of blindness and other eye diseases but also protect eyes from the harms of ultraviolet rays .
Start eating pieces of dry fruits in sweets daily at the time of breakfast or meals .
Whether it is about dropping weight or care of skin , the advice of fresh fruits in meals is given in all the cases .
So , why should it be left for eyes .
The danger of glaucoma , cataract , and blindness can be decreased to a great extent by taking diet rich in vitamin-C .
Including fruit , vegetable in meal is enough to maintain the eyes healthy .
Including these things in your diet you can save your eyes from getting weakened .
Besides this drinking milk , eating carrot is also proved to be beneficial .
Taking diet rich in vitamin-A can also be helpful in keeping eyes healthy .
A little care taken in diet may also put new life in your eyes .
Paralysis may be controlled by yoga .
Paralysis - when generally the functionalism , and dynamism of muscles and pulse of the right or left side of the body go less or end this problem is said to be paralysis .
Paralysis is limited to half of the body , whole of the body or only till face .
The main reason of this problem is increasing high blood pressure , blood clotting in brain , the situation of extreme happiness or sorrow etc .
By yogic exercise this disease can be overcome surely .
Although yoga solves the problem of paralysis permanently but it takes time and is tough .
Therefore medicines should be taken in the beginning and yoga exercises should be done along .
Here the main yogic diagnosis for paralysis are presented .
Start with light exercise .
This can be practiced only by lying down .
After that as the situation improves , add Pavanmuktasana , Vajrasana , Shashankasana , Makarasana etcetera in practice .
What is onikomysis .
Add Suptvajrasana , Trikonasana , Uttanpadasana , Gomukhasana and Ardhmatsyendrasana etc .
Here the method of practice of Janushirasana is presented - sit stretching both the legs forward .
Bending the right leg from the knee touch its sole to the left leg and put the heel below the genitals .
Bringing both the hands to the forefoot of the left leg bend forward so much that the head touches the ground .
Staying in this position for a comfortable period come back to the previous state .
Do the same exercise another side also .
The patients of sciatica and slip disk should avoid its practice .
Narishodhan and ujjayi pranayam play the role of panacea to make brain and central nervous system functional and to balance and function to the nervous system .
Do its practice under the eligible guide according to your capacity without kumbhak or holding of breath .
Yoganidra - the main cause of this problem is mental tension and sentimental imbalance .
Meditation is the best way to free mind from all worries , sorrows , pains , grief and fears .
Do practice this daily for ten to twenty minutes .
Eat simple , easily digestible , nutritious food , eat bread of braned flour , old rice , porridge , pulse of green lentil , take fruits and green vegetables .
Avoid heavy , hard to digest , tea , coffee , tobacco , intoxicating things and exciting element .
Avoid citrus food item .
Apply the walnut oil into the nostrils of the nose daily .
Rub the body from top to bottom with furred towel after bathing .
Use warm water for bathing .
The rising interference of technology in day-to-day life has made us very luxurious .
Though life has become easy with mobile phone , internet but it also has harms .
Why would anyone want to bother his mind when a piece of information or a secret is just a click away .
But later these habits can have lethal impact specially on the capacity of the brain to remember .
The more you use your brain the more capable it will be .
Brain exercise works on this very fundamental .
If daily common work is done in a little different way then all those parts of your brain that was not being used at all earlier would start becoming active .
Changing clothes while keeping the eyes closed , learning a new subject or new game .
Adopting methods like switching on electricity by the left hand instead of the right hand we can open the closed windows of the brain .
A thing is remembered for a long time only when attention is paid to it .
Read attentively whatever is to be remembered , and before going forward concentrate up to eight seconds .
See then how a thing is not remembered .
Everybody has his own way to remember or learn anything .
Some people are better visual learners .
These are the people who learn something after watching or reading .
At the same time some people are better audio learner who learn after listening .
Which method is convenient for you ?
Identify that and use the same to remember .
May be you are a visual learner but to remember read aloud .
It will be better if you try to remember as a poem .
Make it a habit to remember by relating information with a color , smell , taste .
Try to remember the new information by relating it with an old information .
Try to remember any information through words and pictures .
Remembering in chart or short form would also prove helpful .
Brain can also be kept sharpened by adopting some good habits .
Brain gets more oxygen with regular exercise , with which the danger of losing memory also decreases .
Along with some such chemical agents also oozes that will save the cells of brain from getting destroyed .
Tension does not let the mind concentrate .
With more tension hormone cortisol harms the hippocampus of the brain seriously .
The brain remains fresh with having good sleep .
With incomplete sleep there is a tiredness the whole day and it becomes difficult to concentrate on any work .
By smoking cigarette the arteries bringing oxygen to the brain start shrinking with which the brain starts weakening .
Taking plenty of fruits , vegetables is proved to be beneficial for health along with the brain .
Memory gets sharpened with vitamin B , B-12 , B-6 , food items with folic acid such as spinach , green vegetables , strawberry , juicy fruits like watermelon , soybean .
They destroy the homocysteine which harms the nerves .
They help in making red blood corpuscles which brings oxygen to brain .
Vitamin E . and antioxidants are found in tomato , green-tea , broccoli , sweet potato .
They increase the flow of oxygen in body and brain with which the activeness of brain increases .
The brain sharpens by eating fish , walnut and almond also .
HIV stands for ` Human Immuno-deficiency Virus ' .
HIV attacks the immune system of the body .
Immune system is such a system of arrangement in our body that saves us from infection .
Immune system identifies the disease-carrier or ` external invaders ' like virus , bacteria , etc and kills them .
HIV is a virus which attacks the immune system , specially CD-4 cells and destroys them .
CD-4 cells help protect the body from different diseases .
What happens when a person gets infected with the H . . .
By entering into CD-4 cells the HIV increases its number very fast by reproducing and during this new viruses gets born in the cells .
With this the CD-4 cells get divided .
With the division in the CD-4 cells many viruses enter into the blood-circulation .
After this the HIV attacks other CD-4 cells , and this process is repeated again and again .
HIV destroys most of the CD-4 cells and thus the immune system of infected person gets destroyed .
Do get HIV tested .
HIV test is easy , safe and available at public health centres .
The following consequences show up if a person is caught up with AIDS .
A person starts falling ill again and again and continuously goes on weakening .
A person becomes infected easily .
With immune capacity lessened these contractions catch these people very easily .
Do not oppose the people living with AIDS .
Join the great travel of the nation against the HIV and AIDS .
Community Service Centre is for the people infected or unaffected with AIDS .
Here the HIV infected persons are taken full care of and assisted , so that the member of the affected family can live a dignified and complete life .
Generally pap starts developing in girls after the age of 15 years .
Today one small hole is sufficient to remove several diseases of the abdomen and the chest and this method is known as ` Laparoscopic surgery ' or ` key hole ' or ` button hole surgery ' .
To extract gall bladder if a stone has emerged in the gall bladder .
To extract the appendix in case of swelling in the appendix .
To ward off the disease of peptic ulcer .
To repair hiatus hernia .
For the treatment of inguinal hernia .
Apart from this some diseases of the internal parts of chest may also be cured by this method .
For example cancer  abdominal  , the diseases of the liver , diseases related to the intestine etc .
In comparison with the traditional surgical operation this method has many advantages .
In the button hole surgery the patient faces much less pain after operation .
There is no need to stay at hospital for more days due to no stitches being applied .
In the button hole surgery the possibility of hurting the internal components of abdomen is much less .
Because the internal scene is seen expanded on the screen of the television and is seen clearer directly .
Because of only four holes being made the possibility of these wounds getting ripened or infected becomes very less .
The patient stays on bed for about a week after simple surgical operation .
In such a situation they might have to face complexities like pneumonia , clotting in the blood vessels .
These possibilities are negligible in laparoscopy method .
Laparoscopic method takes double time in comparison with the simple treatment .
Patients are administered more anesthetic medicine which has its own harms .
Key hole surgery ' is a revolutionary invention in the field of surgery and more and more patients are being benefited with it .
The virus that can decrease the immune strength of the humans to fight diseases is called HIV .
The situation in which the power to fight against diseases totally languishes or ends is called AIDS .
The treatment of H . . . is not available as yet but it can be avoided completely .
The first patient of AIDS in India was found in 1986 .
From 1986 till 2002 the number of people living with H . . . has become forty five lacs .
AIDS spreads from these .
AIDS spreads through unprotected sex relations .
AIDS spreads by administering infected blood .
AIDS spreads through the use of unboiled or used needle .
AIDS spreads from the HIV infected mother to her issues .
AIDS does not spread through these .
AIDS does not spread through touching , mutual interaction .
AIDS does not spread through living or staying together .
AIDS does not spread through eating together , wearing each-other 's clothes or using same bathroom .
HIV virus gradually destroys the immune system of the body .
Fever does not go down , diarrhoea does not stop , weight decreases .
The blisters of the mouth does not cure and medicines do not affect .
Tuberculosis , pneumonia etc . encircle .
Hundreds of such small creatures live in our body that we can see only through microscope .
Because of AIDS several such symptoms start showing up which give the inkling of AIDS .
Details of some important symptoms are given below .
Frequent fever for a month .
Frequent loose motion for a month .
Frequent cough for a month .
Sudden decrease in body weight by 10 percent .
Wounds or blisters in mouth .
Emergence of frequent freckles or blisters on the body .
Tuberculosis in which medicine does not affect .
Increment of lymph nodes in size at more than one place .
Cyst or swelling on breasts or any other place of the body .
Prevention of AIDS and propagation .
There are many such diseases which have no treatment .
Adopt nutritious food and healthy lifestyle .
Avoid smoking , drinking , intoxicating drugs .
Body-brain both will be happy .
Pay attention to bodily cleanliness .
Maintain only safe sex relations .
Separating and not treating persons living with HIV in a hospital is an offence .
It is necessary to maintain the secrecy of the persons living with HIV
It is necessary to give suggestions to the person living with HIV and their family members .
Why discrimination when all the patients are equal to the doctor .
H . . .  AIDS is not a contagious disease .
Infected persons live a normal life for 10 to 15 years also .
Discrimination with the infected person is unjust and the indicator of our unawareness .
Treatment with them at office , home , among friends should be the same as earlier .
The prevalence rate of blindness in India is 1 . percent , to bring this prevalence rate to 0 . percent the National Programme for Control of Blindness was started by the Government of India .
The main reason of blindness is cataract which is about 55 percent of all blindness .
Under the Nation Programme for Control of Blindness the blind people specially cataract affected people are being benefited by surgical operation .
Special attention is being paid on the quality of the operation of cataract for which all district hospitals , base hospitals are being converted into Microscopic Centres .
The program of eye test of the 10 to 14 years old school students is being run as a campaign in the beginning of the educational session to reduce the prevalence rate of blindness and the poor students suffering from vision problem are being distributed glasses free of cost .
Active help is being taken from all the governmental , non-governmental , voluntary organizations in the Eye Test Programme .
The staffs related to eye department are being trained at different levels by the Government of India to reduce the prevalence rate of blindness .
Among the chief reasons of blindness , cataract is 55 percent , vision problems 19 percent , black cataract 4 percent , corneal pathology 7 percent , others 15 percent .
Generally pure lens or its capsule becomes dim or milky with which the light can not reach inside the eyes and the patient can see dim or less .
After identifying the patient suffering from cataract doctors and eye helpers perform screening in their hospitals .
After that the patient of cataract are operated by eye-surgeon in well maintained hospitals .
Spectacles are tested after 6 weeks .
Camping is done through government , non-government and voluntary organizations after comprehensive propagation by District Blindness Control Committees .
The treatment of cataract is possible through surgery only .
Complete lens capsule is taken out in the method of Intra Capsular Cataract Extraction , after the operation spectacles are used post-test .
During operation lens is implanted at front of the iris , the frontal part of the eye .
In the Extra Capsular Cataract Method , the part of the frontal capsule and the whole of the lens matter is extracted and the posterior part of the capsule is left intact .
Lens is fitted in the capsular bag .
In the S . . . .  Small Incision Cataract Surgery  method . 6 mm tunnel is formed while the rest of the method follows like that of the ECCE-IOL .
No stitches are applied in the S . . . .  Small Incision Cataract Surgery  method .
In black cataract the eye nerves dilapidates gradually . It happens due to extra water pressure in the eye or because of not enough blood reaching in the eye nerves .
The blindness caused by the black cataract can be prevented if it is identified soon and its regular treatment and tests continue .
When the extra pressure is more in the eyes .
If somebody suffers from black cataract in the family .
In most of the patients the part of the water channel from the eyes are open yet for some reasons the water gets lessened .
Internal pressure keeps on increasing and the eye nerves dilapidates , gradually the patient can not see things around , eyesight might also be lost if treatment is not done in time .
Main symptoms on appearance of which a patient should consult a doctor .
Seeing rainbow like colorful ovals in light .
We will check the eye nerves with special lens or equipment to find how much of damage has occurred .
Field test , in which the capacity to see things on the sides while looking straight is tested .
The part  angle  from where the water passes out can be seen through a special lens .
With the lack of vitamin-A the cornea becomes weak and a wound appears through which at last causes blindness .
The lack of vitamin-A is even more imminent in states of measles and malnutrition .
Nyctalopia may occur due to lack of vitamin-A .
Absorption of vitamin-A during lack of vitamin-A in food , continuous diarrhoea and malnutrition .
Demand of vitamin-A during and after measles .
It is visible in dim light .
White surface dries up .
Bitot 's spots - white spots shows up on white surface .
Use gram leaves , fenugreek or methi leaves , spinach , cabbage , coriander , papaya , mango in diet to prevent nyctalopia .
Encouraging mother for milk .
Applying vaccine at the time of measles .
Giving doses of vitamin-A  1 mn I . .  during measles and at an interval of 3 months till 3 years  2 mn I . .  .
It is necessary that children are given nutritious food so that they are saved from the malnutrition caused corneal blindness .
For conjunctival cataract caused by rubella vaccination is required on time .
About 20 to 40 percent of children become blind with one eye due to injuries in the eyes .
It is required that people are educated about the safety of eyes so that blindness caused by crackers , industrial accidents and road traffic accidents could be escaped .
To save eyes from diseases it is necessary to pay attention towards environmental sanitation and treatment is needed on time .
Gradual and painless lessening of vision in one or both of the eyes in a month or year .
Pupil getting gray or white .
When the rays of light do not fall on the retina or falls at the front or back of the retina .
When the rays of light gets collected before the retina .
Fungus is also a kind of being that lives in our body and harms our body .
Fungus creates its abode in damped places like under the nail of our toe .
It is called onikomysis .
The patient can see nearby things clearly but there occurs problem seeing things at a distance .
The patient brings things near to the eyes to see things clearly .
Student tries to sit very near to the blackboard in the classroom .
When the rays of light collects at the back of the eye . This is seen mostly in the young children .
headache , heaviness in the eyes , problem in reading .
Due to weakness in the muscles of the eyes lens can not change its shape . The rays of light falls behind the retina while reading or doing things at a close distance . This is found at an age of 40 years or above .
Shadowiness in reading-writing at a distance or doing things nearby .
If a ray of light can not concentrate at the front or back of the eye it causes shadowiness .
Shadowiness in seeing things nearby or at a distance , headache , reddening of eyes .
Cylindrical glasses have to be worn always .
Cancer is a lifestyle generated disease .
Cancer erupts by our wrong practices , thoughts , behavior and diet .
Smoking excessive cigarette causes more of windpipe cancer .
We progress towards development and getting rid of diseases .
Due to changes in our lifestyle the number of cancer and heart patients are increasing .
This disease is number one in Japan . In developed countries , this disease in at number 2 and in developing countries this disease is at number 3 .
One out of every eight persons can at any time become victim of cancer .
This disease found in different types at different locations in our country due to difference in the lifestyle , customs and religion .
All the data in the country has been calculated . Ovarian cancer and breast cancer is found in 40 percent of the women in cities .
It is between 60 and 65 percent among the rural women .
Lungs and breathing pipe cancer is found more due to smoking and pollution and the possibility of cancer of the mouth and stomach is more with gutkha , pan parag , tobacco and tobacco powder .
What is cancer .
Cancer is name of a disease .
In cancer cells multiply by itself and ignores the rules of the body .
Cells also reach other parts of the body .
Cell takes the form of a cyst or wound , and destroys all the systems coming in contact with it .
Cancer is a group of more than 1000 diseases .
Although each of the disease is different from the other but basically all the types of cancers occurs as a result of anomaly in some cells .
Generally , easy tumors can be weeded out through surgery and there is no possibility of its coming up again .
Difficult tumors are cancer .
Difficult tumors can destroy nearby tissues and parts .
Cancer cells can spread into other areas through which new tumors can get born .
As cancer can spread , it is necessary that the doctor should immediately find whether the tumor is formed and that it is cancer .
The treatment of cancer can start as soon as it is found .
Several symptoms shows up due to cancer that gives the impressions of cancer .
Details of some important symptoms are given below .
If there is an oxalate stone in the kidney what preventions could be advantageous .
Any wound that do not heal in enough time .
Cyst or swelling on breast or any other part of the body .
Abnormal passing of blood or pus from any part or organ of body .
Continuous prolonged bouts of cough or occurrence of heaviness in speech .
Pain in swallowing food or during toilet , continuous indigestion or constipation .
Change in general habits of bowels .
Sudden change in the size , color or shape of moles or warts .
However , such symptoms erupts not just because of cancer , there can be other reasons as well for these .
Therefore one should not take it as cancer just on its appearance .
Show these to the doctor if these symptoms stay for two weeks .
There is no doubt that immediate identification of most of the cancer diseases  60-70 percent  is possible .
The need is to increase the knowledge about it and for every one to take care of oneself .
After identifying cancer early , total treatment is now possible for 60-70 percent of cancer patients .
Not only this , the cost of early identification and immediate treatment is also much lower than late treatment .
Besides being aware of the symptoms of cancer , all the men and the women should get themselves tested regularly .
Some types of cancers can be identified by general tests before any symptoms appear .
Doctors can find out cancer diseases of mouth , breast , cervix , skin , large intestine , rectum , prostate gland , testicle etc . even before any signs appear .
Cancer of the cervix is a common cancer of occurring among women .
Among all the cancers occurring in India 40 percent is that of cervix .
Lymph nodes are connected to lymph arteries and form a white liquid that is called lymph .
The web of lymph arteries is spread throughout the body like blood arteries .
Lymph nodes try to keep cancer cells to itself by filtering them .
On advancement of the cancer it is not able to do this and cancer spreads from one part of the body to other part by lymph .
That is why surgeons usually weed out the lymph nodes nearby the cervix also .
Cervical cancer can spread through blood circulation .
For changes in skin , particularly any kind of growth in moles or warts , you should get tested regularly .
Any kind of changes should be shown to the doctor immediately .
A doctor should also test the skin during general medical check-up .
Regular medical check-up is important for early detection of cancer of the large intestine and the rectum .
A doctor can find out about the disease by inserting gloved finger in the rectum .
Annual test of everybody after the age of 50 years is necessary .
Blood can occur with the faeces due to cancer of the large intestine .
A comprehensive test is mandatory for confirmed diagnosis . The doctor should do a sigmoidoscopy  telescopic test of the rectum  of the rectum and the large intestine in a period of 3 to 5 years for persons crossing the age of 50 years .
The most credible method of finding out the prostate cancer in its initial stage is the test of gloved finger by the doctor .
An annual check-up of everybody above the age of 40 years must be done .
With annual test any irregular or abnormal areas can be found out and it can be known whether there is a tumor or not .
Testicular gland cancer could be found out by most of the men themselves .
Men can find out any changes in the testicular gland by testing themselves every month .
The best time to test it is during the time of bathing with hot water or after , when the testicle is flaccid , as in this situation any changes can be easily figured out .
While testing the testicular gland by oneself , if one finds a swelling , cyst or any other kind of defect , particularly an abnormal pain on touching the testicular gland , pain or heaviness , then the doctor should consulted .
Testicular gland test should also be a part of the regular annual medical test of the humans by the doctors .
Regular test of mouth is required for the signs of mouth cancer .
Change of tissues of mouth can be the initial stage of cancer .
Change of tissues of mouth can be easily seen and experienced .
A dentist should test the mouth of every patient in every form .
Changes occurring in gum , lips and cheek should be paid attention .
Scab cracks , swelling , bleeding or cyst or tumor in any part of the mouth should be paid special attention .
You must get tested by a doctor or a dentist .
If you are eating tobacco , betel , pan masala or zarda then the test is even more essential .
You can also view your mouth in the mirror and in case of any changes , you can take advice of the doctor .
All the women should know how to test their own breasts and each month they should test their breasts themselves .
It is good to test the breasts a few days after the menstruation period when there is no possibility of breasts becoming large or any pains at all .
Even if the menstruation period has stopped , women should appoint a day  whenever  each month for test .
This test is specially important for women above the age of 40 years .
The danger of breast cancer increases in age above 40 years .
If a woman feels a cyst or any kind of change in the breasts she should consult a doctor .
About 80 percent of the cysts of the breasts are not cancer but only a doctor can correctly find it out .
Any abnormal situations like cyst in the breasts or breasts becoming very large must be tested during the medical test of women .
After the age of 40 years every women must get mammogram done in 1 to 2 years .
If the age of women goes up to 50 years then mammogram should be done every year .
The women whose mothers , sister , blood aunts etc . have cancer should start getting mammography done since 25-30 years .
Cancer is tested through pathology .
It is seen in microscope .
Cancer can be found out through other tests like X-ray . . . Scan . . . . ultrasound also .
List of training test centres where cancer can be tested .
Surgery depends on the stage of the cancer .
If cancer is in a limited area and in initial stage then along with the affected area some normal areas are also extracted .
It is attempted that no particle of cancer is left out .
If cancer has also entered other areas then surgery is done to lessen the size of the cancer .
Cancer cells are burnt through laser .
Before laser , calculation of area of cancer , spread , capacity of the patient , time of laser based on the cancer , stage , area strength is done .
Then a mark applied on the skin .
Entry for any other person is prohibited in that room during the laser .
There is no pain in radioactive rays .
Sometimes the skin may become red or patient may feel like vomiting .
Some cancers like blood cancer and the cancer of the cysts can be fully treated with medicine .
These medicines destroy the cancer cells .
General cells may also be affected with these medicines .
Nails may fall .
There might occur a decrement in blood which may cause tiredness .
If the patient takes medicine in regular cycle and eats healthy food he can recover fully .
During the treatment blood should be tested regularly , one should have clean water and clean food .
One should not sit with a sick person because the immune strength gets very lessened with medicines .
Incurable cancer patients are kept in palliative care so that their physical , mental pain could be lessened .
List of hospitals where the treatment of cancer is available .
Awareness and prevention from cancer .
Prevention from tobacco and tobacco related products and quitting control .
Eating fresh fruits and green vegetables , clean normal vegetarian food .
Exercise fast for at least half an hour everyday .
Lessening the use of excessive chilly , fried , roasted meat , ghee , wine .
Not making any physical relationship before the age of 18 years .
Staying faithful to one 's partner productive organs clean .
Feeding children one 's own milk for a long time .
Using condoms during the copulation .
Bringing awareness in society .
Giving information about the harms of smoking and tobacco .
Keeping oneself clean and staying away from bad habits .
Encouraging reforms in rural and urban lifestyle through government and non-government department and social organizations .
Giving information about breasts and mouth tests and getting an annual medical check-up of one 's health after 35 years .
Anganwadi workers have been given the information related to cancerous symptoms , self-breast tests , mouth test and prevention .
Information related to cancer , its symptoms , harms of tobacco , self-breast test and prevention has been given in Junior High Schools .
All the hospitals , Superintendant Base hospital , district hospital , women hospital , medical college and private hospitals in the state have been asked to maintain a cancer register .
They will register cancer patients coming to their outdoor department and post this report to the directorate every month .
We will find out what is the number of cancer patients in the state and in which area which cancer has been found more .
Chicken pox  varicella  .
Chicken pox is a viral that erupts out of a contact with varicella zoster  VZV  .
Fever and eruption of a special kind of papules is the sign of chicken pox .
A virus spreads from one person to another person through air born drops .
It erupts through the spread of the spray of saliva in the nearby environment on sneezing or coughing of a person infected with chicken pox .
It can also spread through a direct contact with chicken pox or herpes because there is contagious liquid in raw wounds .
In some cases it can also spread from an infected pregnant mother to the unborn or to a new born baby .
Chicken pox is the most contagious a few days before the papules erupt and before the scab spreads over the wounds i . . till it dries up which often happens a week after the spots have started .
Fever , shivering , nausea and vomiting are the most clear and famous symptoms , eruption of blisters and extreme itching freckles .
In most of the children 200-300 blisters erupt that later become scabs .
Chicken pox can attack both young and adult , men and women .
Most of the people become victim of chicken pox one time or the other in their childhood or adolescence .
But if adults who had never been a victim of chicken pox come into contact with such a case , they are in danger of contraction and they may suffer from chicken pox in adulthood .
Chicken pox is more serious in adolescents and adults in comparison with children .
Fever stays for a longer time .
Keeping infected persons away from school or work helps in decreasing the spread of the virus but vaccination is an effective solution to escape the pain of chicken pox .
Fever is estimated with symptoms like high fever , acute body pain , headache , joint pain , eye pain and finding of papules on body .
Besides the above general symptoms , complaints of bleeding from teeth , mouth or nose also occur in serious patients of chicken pox .
Tourniquet test comes positive in chicken pox patients and platelet count is found less than 1 lac on blood test .
Dengue fever occurs after a sting of aedes aegypti .
Aedes aegypti is also known by the name of tiger mosquito and it stings during the day time .
Do not keep water collected at home in coolers , in tanks on root , empty disused tin cans , in tyres , in flower pots , in empty bottles , money plants , bottles and cisterns .
Keep the water in coolers , tubs , pitchers at home changing twice a week .
Do not let water collect near home .
Fill the ditches with soil .
If filling with soil is not possible , spray kerosene oil etc . in the ditch .
Use neem oil or mustard oil over body .
Use full sleeve shirts and socks .
You must get boys wear full sleeve clothes and socks when they are going to school .
Get insecticides sprayed at home .
Keep the environment clean at home and nearby .
Get treatment during the disease outburst , on coming of fever at the government hospital health center .
You must use mosquito nets or anti-mosquito incense sticks while sleeping .
You must install nets on windows , doors and clerestorys .
Non-steroidal drugs should not be taken in dengue fever .
Diabetes is such a kind of disease as a result of which sugar becomes very high in blood .
Diabetes is a serious disease which , if not controlled , can be killing .
On being under attack of diabetes our body forms insulin which helps in lessening sugar .
Sugar increases in the blood with lack of insulin .
If you have the following symptoms then you may have diabetes .
Frequent feeling of urination .
Feeling more thirsty and dim vision .
Physical inability in sexual activities .
Numbness in feet or paralysing feeling in them .
Problems occurring from diabetes .
The following problems and complexities can emerge from diabetes .
Excess of sugar in blood , long term complexities .
Damage to tendons or neuropathy .
Damage to kidney or nephropathy .
Damage to eyes or retinopathy .
Disease and contraction of heart and blood vessels .
Long term complexities of diabetes .
damage to tendons : diabetes damages the tendons of feet and hands .
Shivering , numbness , inflammation or pain may occur due to damage to the tendons which often starts from the tip of the fingers of your feet or hands and increases gradually upwards .
If treatment is not done then you can lose the power of feeling in the affected organs .
Damage to kidney : Delicate filtering system present in the kidney may be damaged with diabetes by which kidneys may stop working and dialysis or kidney transplantation may be required .
Diabetes may damage the retina of your eyes which may cause blindness .
Disease of heart and blood vessels : The main complexity of diabetes is the damage of heart and blood vessels by which heart attack , paralysis and defect in blood circulation may occur .
Studies have proved that dangers of heart attack and paralysis is more among the people with diabetes than those who do not have diabetes .
Excess of sugar in the infected blood decreases your immune strength and the danger of infection increases by this .
Your mouth , gums , lungs , skin , feet , kidney , bladder and the areas of reproductive organs , all of them can be easily affected with contagion .
Dangers of diabetes related complexities can be decreased to a great extent with the control of sugar in the blood and adopting healthy lifestyle .
The chances of bringing the situation back to the pre-damage stage or minimizing it increases by finding out the complexities early through regular medical tests .
Every disease occurs due to a type of virus .
Virus is so small that they can not be seen through common microscope .
If polluted mosquito bites a person then the virus enters into the body of that person .
After about 4 to 14 days the symptoms of disease start appearing in that person .
Usually the following symptoms are found in the patients of diabetes .
High fever .
Acute pain .
Stiffness in neck .
Stiffness in body .
Strokes in body .
Nausea and vomiting .
Fainting or total nervousness .
As soon as the above mentioned symptoms appear the patient should immediately be admitted for treatment at the nearby primary health center , sub-divisional government hospital or district hospital .
Malaria spreads through mosquitoes therefore it is necessary that the number of mosquitoes be decreased in community .
Disease carrying mosquitoes mainly reside outside home in paddy fields , ponds and ditches filled with water .
Pay special attention towards cleanliness at home and outside .
Fill the ditches , cut tall grass and bushes .
Wear pants , pyjama , dhoti , socks , full sleeved kurta or shirt in the evening .
Use mosquito nets while sleeping wherever possible .
Do not let rain water collect near the ditches nearby house .
Cooperate with the health staffs in sprinkling insecticides and fogging .
Use fine nets to stop mosquitoes enter the pigsties .
Get the vaccine of encephalitis administered in time .
Hepatitis-A is one of the most widespread disease spreading in the whole world .
This occurs due to Hepatitis-A virus and it is common at places with bad level of cleanliness .
Virus attacks lever and causes diseases of different intensity to emerge in the patients .
Hepatitis-A viral spreads in the faeces and at first it spreads through the anal passage .
The virus comparatively takes long time to show symptoms and is contagious .
Therefore the infected person can spread the disease to other people even before it develops .
Nausea , jaundice , purge , light colored faeces , stomach ache , weakness , tiredness , fever , shivering , not feeling hungry , neck pain etc .
Symptoms are dependent on the frequency of emergence .
Hepatitis-A and V are two different kinds of viral hepatitis that occur due to different kinds of viruses .
Every type of hepatitis is different .
Hepatitis-A can not be avoided with the vaccination of hepatitis-B .
Similarly , hepatitis-B can not be avoided with the vaccination of hepatitis-A .
The vaccine is available now and is the most practical solution against hepatitis-A .
Primary vaccination keeps a person safe for a year and the booster dose administered after six months gives safety for about 20 years .
A combined vaccine is available from Glaxosmithkline which provides safety from , both hepatitis-A and hepatitis-B through a single safety order administered at 0 . . months .
The combined vaccine of hepatitis-A and hepatitis-B is available in two forms .
Paediatric dose : One dose is of 0 . ml for children and adolescents .
Adult dose : The dose is of 1 . ml for adults of the age of 16 years and above .
Hepatitis-B is a worldwide disease which occurs due to hepatitis-B virus  HBV  .
HBV affects mainly liver by which an inflammation occurs .
The cells of liver gets destroyed and the function of liver often gets interrupted .
The results of infection are different and unexpected .
The results of infection are dependent on the age of patient and state of the capacity of the immune system .
Hepatitis-B is extremely contagious and it is thought to be 100 times more contagious than the HIV .
In comparison with AIDS , Hepatitis-B victimises more people to death in the whole year .
Blood is the most important vehicle in the spread of hepatitis-B disease but it can also spread through other body fluids in which sperm , vaginal fluids and saliva are included .
HBV spreads in three ways , from mother to child , at birth time and from person to person .
The most effective and convenient solution for safety from hepatitis-B and its resultant chronic carrier state or liver cancer is vaccination .
After vaccination people who have developed protective anti-bacterial reactions can get total safety from intense and old contraction along with diseases .
With extensive use of hepatitis-B vaccination a remarkable decrease has been seen in hepatitis-B infection and the liver cancer arising out of long term hepatitis-B .
Yellow fever is also called yellow jack , black vomit , Negro 's vomit or American Plague .
The combined vaccine is made for children and adults .
What precautions should be taken after operation so that hernia does not occur again .
The huge problem of increasing population has stayed in India after independence .
The family welfare program was run at the national level in the year of 1952 .
On the subject of population and development it was suggested at an international conference in Cairo  Egypt  in the year of 1994 that it would be necessary for human welfare and development to conjugate reproductive health safety along with reforms to family welfare .
All the reproduction health safety should be kept in the form of a single element within family planning services .
Therefore the concept of Reproductive and Child Health Programme was born .
Reproductive and Child Health Programme is being run since the year of 1997 in India .
This program has been running in Uttarakhand since the constitution of the state .
Reproduction rate has always been low in Uttarakhand in comparison with the original state Uttar Pradesh .
Raw birth rate of this state in the period of 1951-1956 was 48 which decreased to become 35 in the period of 1976-1981 and during the years of 1994-2001 this rate lowered more and stayed at 26 only .
Among the districts this rate is the least in Paudi while the most in Haridwar .
Gross reproduction rate  the number of infants given birth by a woman in her life time  which was estimated to be more than 5 for the period of 1971-76 , has been continuously decreasing and in the year of 2001 this number was 3 . .
Inter district differences has also occurred less during this period .
Raw birth rate and gross reproduction rate has been different in urban and rural areas .
It is the desire of son that will affect the future reproductive level of the state .
Generally , birth rate is lower the hilly areas than in the plain areas .
About one fourth of the women give birth to the next child within 24 months .
A little less than half of the mothers  46 percent  give birth to more than 3 kids .
About 42 percent of the births come in the category of serious danger .
It is difficult to comment on the tendencies and styles of the decrement in the death rate due to lack of information on death rate related to Uttarakhand in particular .
According to the estimates of Sample Registration System  S . . .  the death rate was estimated 7 on the population of every 1000 during the year of 2000 which is lower than the national average of 9 .
The infant mortality rate of the state was 50 every 1000 live births in the year of 2000 which is very less than the national rate  68  .
Two third deaths out of the total infant mortality number occurs during the period of infancy itself .
Infant mortality rate in Uttarakhand is 19 per 1000 live births .
Data related to maternal mortality rate of the state is not available .
Considering odd physical situations of the state it can be said that the maternal mortality rate in the state would be very high .
Non-communicable disease is becoming a big cause of death with changes occurring in the life style due to modernization and urbanization .
The goal of Reproductive and Child Health Welfare Programme is to bring about decline in the maternal mortality rate and infant mortality rate .
This program is being run to give special importance to the participation of men with relation to Reproductive and Child Health Welfare Programme , to provide complete knowledge of protected and effective contraceptive methods to men and women , to make medical facilities available to the pregnant women during pregnancy and to help parents get healthy new born babies .
The goal of health programs is to increase the rate of parent security to 49 . percent till 2006 , 55 . percent till 2010 , and 95 percent till 2020 .
The rate of childbirth security to 60 percent till 2006 , 80 percent till 2010 and institutional childbirths has increased to the maximum .
Main works under the Reproductive and Child Health Programme .
Main works being run under the program are as follows .
Organisation of R . . . camps .
Organisation of R . . . Outdoor sessions .
Appointment of women health workers on contract .
Comprehensive construction work and repairing of health units .
Urban Reproductive and Child Health Programme .
Appointment of supplementary A . . . on contract .
Appointment of 258 supplementary A . . . on contract basis in the unserved and rural areas has been made to increase the immunisation of mothers and children and the acceptability of contraceptives .
On the directions of the Government of India service is being made available at 39 PHCs and 26 CHCs with the goal to provide secure childbirth from 8 o'clock at night to 7 o'clock in the morning at PHCs and CHCs .
900 untrained midwives have been trained in Uttarakhand in the year of 2001-2002 and 2002-03 to provide services of safe labor to pregnant mothers .
560 untrained midwives have been trained in the year of 2004-2005 .
5 Safe Maternity Counsellors  Women Medical Officer  were accepted to be appointed by the Government of India on a contract basis under the E . . . scheme .
After the advertisements in newspapers for appointment three women medical officers were selected out of which only 1 women medical officer has reported her contribution at Agastyamuni CHC of district Rudraprayag .
Care of the health of women and children and vaccination is being done on a village council level by organising an Outreach Session on a defined day  Saturday  by women health workers at the level of each village council in the state .
The said program has been scrapped by the Govt . of India since July , 2004 .
But the above mentioned program is being run in the state with the help of women health workers .
Medicines are being bought at the state level under the RCH program .
RCH kits are being provided directly to the districts by the Government of India .
For equipments bought at the level of the state the provision is to purchase after the recommendation of the Executive Committee constituted at the state level by the Purchase Committee constituted at the level of the Head Office .
Special work has been done in districts in the year of 2003-2004 for propagation of NSV  without cut , without stitch  method to increase the participation men in population stabilisation .
Population stabilisation , installation of stable RN hoarding , wall paintings , orientation of the members of the Panchayati Raj and medical and paramedical staff from the medical department and other media exhibition etc . were done .
Leprosy is a bacteria born contagious disease .
The name of this bacteria is microbacterium leprae .
Microbacterium leprae affects mainly the nervous system and the skin .
Incubation period of leprosy is three years on an average and this disease grows very slowly .
Leprosy can affect persons of any age and sex equally .
The M . . . medicine cures the patient completely by eradicating the leprosy bacteria and prevents the disease from spreading in the society .
All the leprosy patients are not contagious .
Most of the patients are non-contagious who can not spread the disease , only 15 to 20 percent patients are contagious .
Leprosy is comparatively much less contagious than other diseases such as measles . . . etc .
About 95 percent of the people have the resistance capability to fight leprosy thereby this disease can not happen to them .
The main symptoms and identification of leprosy are as follows .
A light yellow or discolored reddish spot or stain on skin of the body that has numbness . . . the spot has no feeling of pain , inflammation , itching or piercing or cold and hot .
Oily shine on the skin .
Thickness of cyst on skin , eyebrows , chin , ears .
Do not do any hard work for three months after the operation of hernia .
Thrilling sensation , numbness or dryness in hands or feet .
Occurrence of deformation in the fingers of hands or feet .
Initiation and spread of leprosy .
Leprosy often starts with a spot or freckle on the body that is numb .
If this gets treated in the initial stage then the disease is cured completely and the disability does not get aroused in it that is the main reason of social excommunication .
If the treatment is not done due to careless or lack of right information about leprosy then the disease keeps on growing .
Fingers start becoming malformed , wounds erupt in hands and feet and the face starts looking ugly .
Most of the people reach the doctor for advice in this stage .
Wounds and ulcer form because of no care for the numb and insensitive parts of the leprosy patients .
Complete treatment is possible even in the stage of wound and ulcer but the disability and deformity that occurred due to lateness in treatment can not be brought back to the previous state through medicines .
Yes , the hands and feet of the disabled person can be formed in such a way through simple operations so that the patient can work again and run his livelihood .
Malaria spreads through the bite of female anopheles mosquito .
Female anopheles mosquitoes get born in clean water and bites at night .
Fever along with shivering and cold comes often the third day .
You must change water collected in pots at home once a week .
Use mosquito nets while sleeping or apply mustard oil on open parts of the body .
Install fine nets on windows of house .
Do not let water collect near yourself .
If this is not possible then pour some petro-lubricants oil on the collected water .
The disease of measles can take a very serious form in developing countries because the death rate due to this is more than 10 percent .
Therefore it is recommended to administer its vaccination to the children at the earliest possible .
Besides the antibody level of mothers and doses of vaccination , considering the incidents of the disease it is recommended by the World Health Organisation to administer the vaccine of measles to the children at the age of nine months .
Among the indications and symptoms of measles are included - fever , common symptoms of cold , conjunctivitis , cough , stains inside mouths and the red papules erupting on the skin .
Besides this , loose motion , stomach ache and lack of hunger like symptoms may also be show up during the contraction .
In comparison with children the symptoms of measles shows up more seriously in adolescents , its incubation period is about 10-12 days and almost no symptoms of this disease shows up from outside during this period .
During the period of 10 to 12 days , at first a local contraction occurs due to the virus in the breathing passage and then the contagion spreads into other parts of the body as well .
After this having spread through the whole of the blood circulation the virus takes the form of primary disease .
The period between the entrance of the bacteria and the start of the disease .
Mumps or contagious perotitis is a kind of serious contagious disease in which a swelling emerges in one or both of saliva glands near the jaws and starts paining .
Saliva glands are present inside the cheeks in front of the ears and respectively on the lower surface of the mouth .
Besides this , mouth also starts drying up due to mumps .
Rubella or German measles is also extremely contagious which occurs in children , adolescents and youths .
Rubella occurring immediately after birth is generally nominal and stays only for a while .
The most clear symptoms of rubella disease light red papules . The most important problem of this disease is that its virus grows very fast as a result of which birth defects occur in children .
About 25 to 50 percent of rubella contraction does not get known and when its symptoms emerge they are very light and shows up clearly .
When rubella occurs in adults then fever comes to them two days before the papules emerge and their hunger also gets lessened .
Live attenuated vaccines of measles , mumps and rubella are in the form an amalgamated single vaccine which is called MMR .
MMR vaccines are more effective because there are different related breed in this single virus vaccine .
The use of MMR vaccines has been extremely effective .
Immunisation power achieved with MMR stays for more time and almost throughout the life .
Start exercises three months after operation to keep muscles of stomach healthy .
However the goal of the first step taken for measles is execution of Primary Vaccination Programme .
The World Health Organisation believes that a single dose is not enough to eradicate measles .
Therefore now it is recommended by both W . . . and the UNICEF that besides giving its first dose at 9 months administration of second vaccine is also very necessary to protect these children from measles .
Disorder of the brain , that affects the capacity to think , understand , work or feel .
Such a system of brain is called mental disorder .
It is estimated that 1-2 percent of the population are afflicted with serious mental disease and about 5 percent are victims of common mental disease .
It is estimated that out of the outdoor patients coming to the hospitals 25 percent are mentally ill .
Mental disease can occur in several ways for as purblindness , epilepsy , sleeplessness , hypersomnia , change in copulation and copulation process , mood change , schizophrenia , dementia , delirium , change in personality .
Yellow fever is an extreme virus generated disease .
Yellow fever is a main disease is African and Latin American countries .
It is called yellow fever because in many of its patients symptoms of jaundice shows up .
Not paying attention to any work .
Being sad without any reason .
Getting angry very soon , very often .
Change in mood very soon , being sorry from happiness and getting happy again .
Getting disturbed soon by the small talk of children .
Thinking oneself as always correct and others wrong .
Emergence of desire to take tobacco , alcohol , cannabis , marijuana .
Problem in desire or the process of copulation .
Before declaring mental disorder for any patient his total mental agony is seen  in which present problems , old and new problems , family or problems near him can be seen  and then his physical and mental test is done .
If needed , lab tests of ECG , RFT , LFT , EEG and CT scan , diagnostic standardized intervenes and psychological test are done .
Treatment of mental diseases can be done through the following methods .
Listening to the patient and his family and providing information about his mental health .
Encouraging the patient to change emotionally .
Making people aware by propagating for mental health through press . . . radio , health fairs , posters , banners etc in every district .
Making social environment better , encouraging participation and social relations among people in the society .
Finding out about the mental , social and personality change since the start .
Running tests in schools , colleges , government and non-government institutes .
Treating emotional and mental disorders , enabling families to undergo difficult situations .
Solving the social and personal problems of the patient .
Treating the mental patient and lessening the difficulty of the family and society .
Saving a mental patient from falling ill again .
The following is be executed in the state under the mental health program .
State Mental Health Authority has been constituted in the state since 4 April , 2002 .
A 30 bed State Mental Hospital is being constructed at Dehradun under the Mental Health Authority program .
Two districts of Uttarakhand have been chosen under the District Mental Health Programme .
Dehradun in the Garhwal division and Nainital in the Kumaun division .
For which a proposal of 184 . 30 lac has been sent to the Government of India .
This program will be implemented in both the districts of Dehradun and Nainital .
The National Maternity Benefit Scheme has been transferred from Social Welfare Department to Health Welfare Department since 14 . . 2001 by the Government of India .
The process of transfer is now complete .
The National Maternity Benefit Scheme is being implemented by the Health Department in the state of Uttarakhand .
Under the National Maternity Benefit Scheme above 19 year old women living below the poverty line are given an assistance of Rs . 500 on first live delivery for proper nutrition .
The details of the capital received from the Government of India and the intended beneficiaries in 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 under the National Maternity Benefit Scheme are as follows .
The following programs are being run in the state of Uttarakhand under the Maternity and Infant Welfare Services .
A little less than half of the pregnant women are able to get pre-delivery tests done in Uttarakhand while this is 65 percent at the national level .
The percentage of the women getting the pre-delivery test done thrice is only 18 .
There is a huge difference in view of the numbers of women getting the advantage of pre-delivery services in the urban and the rural areas .
More than three fourth of the women  78 percent  in the urban areas gets the pre-delivery test done at least once while a little more than one third of rural pregnant women do so .
A little more than one third  39 percent  of the pregnant women take supplementary doses of iron folic acid pills .
In cases of tetanus Toxoid injection 54 percent of the pregnant women have got two or more than two injections of T . . however such women in the rural areas are 49 percent and in the urban areas 77 percent .
Generally there is much less vogue of pre-delivery services among uneducated mothers and in the families of low living standards , the following works are done mainly under this service .
Indicating pregnant women .
Distribution of pills to prevent anemia and referencing of proper cases of complex cases .
There are only 21 percent of institutional delivery in Uttarakhand .
This is 42 percent in cities while in rural areas more than 82 percent of labor occurs at home and out of these more than half of these conclude with the help of the midwives .
Even in urban areas more than half  56 percent  of childbirths takes place at home .
In Uttarakhand about one fourth of the childbirths conclude with the help of doctors and about 10 percent with trained maids , assistant health workers and midwives .
Out of seven childbirths completing outside the medical institutions only one childbirth  14 percent  is benefitted with post-labour tests within two months .
Safe childbirth and referencing of complex cases is mainly done under the post-childbirth services .
Care for mother and the newborn baby , referencing of complex cases , vaccination of babies , distribution of vitamin-A solution to protect children from blindness , proper advice and services for limited family and family planning and abortion .
A comparative detail of the achievements under maternity services till the year of 2001-2002 , 2002-2003 and 2003-2004 has been shown in the following table .
The disease called poliomyelitis occurs due to an extremely contagious virus which attacks only humans .
This contagious virus spreads generally through the medium of water or on coming in contact with infected person .
However this disease can also spread through mouth to mouth .
Polio disease particularly attacks young children .
80 to 90 percent of the cases of polio are often seen in children less than 3 years of age .
Polio is an extremely contagious disease .
Till the infection of one person in the family is known the possibility of contraction to other members also arises because this infection spreads rapidly , this virus spreads faster because of crowded places clean toilet facilities .
Oral Poliovirus Vaccine  OPV  was first used in the contemporary Soviet Union .
As a result of the technique developed in this country new methods of controlling or eradicating polio was discovered in other countries .
The most relevant proof of the great success of OPV is the Polio Eradication Programme being run throughout the world .
The Pulse Polio Programme run in India for polio eradication has also been very much successful .
Combined DTP vaccines have been used the world over since 1940 itself and great success has been achieved in lessening the clinical pertussis with its help .
By giving 3 doses of DTP vaccines to children they can be made protected against the disease like diphtheria , tetanus and pertussis .
Diphtheria is such a contagion that affects throat , mouth and nose .
Diphtheria is a contagious disease , easily contractible , but after its vaccine being developed it is found less very less .
Sex related diseases are contagious diseases . This disease gets communicated from the infected patient to one 's sex partner during sexual intercourse .
This is the reason that these diseases are called sexually transmitted diseases , their contraction is easy .
Contraction of sexually transmitted diseases is easy .
Sexually transmitted diseases are serious and painful .
The most found diseases of the sexually transmitted disease group are - gonorrhoea , herpes chlamydia .
Many sexually transmitted diseases show some symptoms initially , these symptoms end without any treatment .
Some sexual diseases specially in women create either common symptoms or no symptoms at all .
Person infected with sexual disease looks totally healthy but he can infect his sexual partner or unborn children .
Uncommon oozing or stench , pain below abdomen  between naval and the reproductive organs  .
Inflammation near vagina or pain in the depths of the vagina , symptoms both is men and women .
Wounds near reproductive organs , swelling or papules and crust in mouth , pain with inflammation in the urinary tract while urinating or excreting .
Fever , cold , body ache like in flu , swelling near reproductive organs .
If proper treatment of sexually infected diseases is not done then complexities may arise in them .
Dead birth due to inborn syphilis .
The birth of undeveloped baby may also occur due to contagious diseases .
Blindness in children due to gonorrhoea contraction .
Swelling in conjuctiva of the eye .
Contracted sexual behavior is the best method for safety from sexually generated disease .
The following directions could be helpful in sexually transmitted disease .
Do not copulate with the sexual partners who have papules , reddening , wound or inflammation in their reproductive organs .
Keep away from uncommon sexual relations .
Wash the reproductive organs immediately after sexual intercourse .
HIV contraction can also be lessened with safety from sexually generated diseases .
It is always right to do immediate treatment to stop spread of contraction in case of the occurrence of complexities .
Remember , encourage for regular tests if safe sexual behavior is not followed .
Most of the sexually generated disease get completely treated with proper treatment .
Tuberculosis is a contagious disease .
Tuberculosis occurs due to contraction of microbacterium tuberculosis .
The tuberculosis disease spreads through air from a tuberculosis patient to a healthy person and can happen to people of any age or sex .
A tuberculosis patient can infect 10-15 persons in a year .
About 1000 adults die everyday of tuberculosis in India which is much higher than the total number of deaths occurring due to all other diseases .
Tuberculosis can occur in any part of the body such as lungs , bones , joints or the sides of lymph nodes .
This disease is found commonly in the lungs .
In comparison to any other infected patients the youths die the most of the disease .
Because it is the youths who die the most of it therefore social and economic loss is much .
The quantity of tuberculosis in the society is too much . People are afraid to say about this and proper tests could not be get done .
In comparison to any other disease there are more orphans due to tuberculosis .
According to fresh research 3 lac children in India drop out of school due to this disease every year .
The maximum number of tuberculosis patients in the world are found in India .
Although the incidence of privilege rate is not available but studies state that the incidence rate is about 256 per lac .
In comparison to any other disease women die the most of tuberculosis in India .
The number of women dying of tuberculosis is more than the deaths caused by all other reasons combined .
This has been found in fresh studies that one lac women are thrown away from homes because of tuberculosis .
In comparison with healthy humans the danger of tuberculosis in HIV positive humans increases 5 times .
Tuberculosis infected patients should be treated with the DOTS strategy .
Coughs of 3 weeks or more is the chief symptom of tuberculosis  of the lungs  .
The easy way of diagnosis of tuberculosis of the lungs is three times test of the phlegm .
The bacteria of the tuberculosis comes out of the patient in the form of droplets on coughing or sneezing .
The bacteria out in the air enters into healthy humans through breath and infects the healthy person with tuberculosis .
Diagnosis is done by testing the bacteria of tuberculosis in the phlegm , X-ray is also used if necessary .
List of training test centres where cancer can be tested .
Tuberculosis can be completely cured .
If the patient does the treatment regularly .
There is treatment for tuberculosis but on recovering a little the patient quits treatment .
Treatment in tuberculosis is now done through the DOTS strategy .
In DOTS strategy patient is administered medicines under the direct care of the health workers .
Which is called DOTS  Directly Observed Treatment with Short course chemotherapy  .
As is revealed from the name - Directly Observed Treatment with Short course chemotherapy means that patient takes short courses of anti-tuberculosis drugs in presence of health worker .
There are two stages in the treatment of tuberculosis .
Intensive phase which goes on for 2-3 months .
Continuation phase is of 4-5 months which depends on the category of the treatment patient is taking .
Under this program these medicines are taken thrice a week on alternate days for 2-3 months  intensive phase  .
After this phlegm is tested which if found negative , the patient is issued anti-tuberculosis drugs once in a week in the calendared multi-blistered combo pack .
Remember , the first dose of the weekly pack has to be taken before the health worker .
During the continuation phase after two months phlegm should be tested and also after the treatment is complete .
You will watch the patient during the period of continuation phase .
The best way to check the disease is that if all the phlegm patients are made negative then the patient can not infect and whoever human is having coughs of more than three weeks then he should be encouraged to take DOTS after the three phlegm test .
Yellow fever is mosquito communicated disease .
Yellow fever is supposed to be the cause of several epidemics .
Yellow fever occurs due to an arbovirus of the family of flaviviridae .
Arbovirus is a gram positive single-formula RNA virus .
Like malaria this virus also enters into humans through mosquito saliva .
The mosquitoes that spread yellow fever aedes simpsaloni , aedes africanus and aedes aegypti .
Children can be saved from tuberculosis by administering BCG vaccine .
Vaccine must be administered after birth as early as possible .
Refer the patient for treatment to the near primary health center or district tuberculosis disease center .
Send the persons having cough with phlegm or without phlegm or phlegm with blood for three weeks or more to the primary health center or district tuberculosis disease center for tests .
Keep enquiring about the tuberculosis patients whether they went to the primary health center or district tuberculosis disease center for advice or not .
You must get all the babies of the area vaccinated for BCG with the help of the health workers  women  .
Educate people all about the prevention of tuberculosis and controlling it .
Two medicine stores - Dehradun and Udham Singh Nagar - have been built in the state to distribute medicines .
So that the medicines could be made available to far-off districts in time .
Supply of medicines is done by the Government of India .
To run Revised National Tuberculosis Control Programme properly a four-wheeler vehicle has been made available by the Government of India in 8 districts  Tehri , Paudi , Uttarkashi , Chamoli , Nainital , Pithauragarh , Almora and Dehradun  .
Each treatment centres has been provided with a two-wheeler by the Government of India .
Each Microscopic Centre has been provided with one binocular microscope .
5 districts  Haridwar , Udham Singh Nagar , Rudraprayag , Bageshwar and Champawat  have been provided with four wheeler vehicle by the State Government .
Tetanus is a type of infection which occurs due to such bacteria that are found in dust , dirt and rusted metals .
The bacteria of tetanus enters inside through normal cuts occurring to the body .
Muscles convulse because of the bacteria .
If the bacteria attack the muscles of the jaws then jaws convulse and the mouth neither opens nor it closes .
Generally it is very fast but some of its slow cases shows up when a person is already infected with a flavivirus .
After the infection the virus at first increases its number by reproducing locally , after that it spreads throughout the body through lymph carrying arteries .
The muscle of the breathing pipe also convulse due to tetanus .
This is a kind of bacteria that closes the lungs with phlegm  a kind of sticky , wet material  due to which such an acute sound comes out on coughing as if a dog is barking .
The start of yellow fever starts suddenly 3 to 5 days after the infection .
Because of bacteria such organisms may also emerge that causes pneumonia and bronchitis  infection of the lungs  .
Typhoid fever is such a disease that starts as an infection in the gastrointestinal passage and takes the form of a full-fledged disease .
The cause of typhoid is a type of insect that is called salmonella typhi .
Each patient has different symptoms of it but some symptoms are included in common symptoms - periodic fever , headache , tiredness and weakness , change in behavior and stomach problems in the initial stage of the disease and constipation followed by loose motion .
When any food item or beverage with salmonella typhi is taken then generally most of organic constituents become inactive by the presence of the acid present in the abdomen .
If these insects reach the abdomen in great numbers then some of these insects reach the small intestine .
Vaccine is the most effective and reliable solution for safety for typhoid fever .
Typhoid vaccination is recommended by different international and national health officers for persons traveling the regional areas .
This vaccination is also recommended for school children and youth and adults as well in the areas where typhoid fever is present as a major public health problem in the persons of that age group .
Salmonella typhi with antibiotic resistance is found in typhoid fever .
This is how you should take care of your teeth .
High fever , cold , bleeding from skin , high heart pulse , headache , waist pain and diabetes occur in serious cases of yellow fever .
The death rate goes up to 85 % on the spread of yellow fever as an epidemic .
Yellow fever disease spreads in different ways in the rural and jungle areas and in the urban areas .
The effect is very high in the cities due to more density of population and more carrier mosquito population .
There is no real treatment for yellow fever .
Most of the virus generated diseases do not have a cure , only corollary treatment and treatment on the basis of symptoms are done .
The patient of fever should be given a lot of rest , fresh air and plenty of liquid to drink .
In the hamster model of the yellow fever using ribavirin early is considered to an effective treatment .
Ribavirin is effective in yellow fever in the same as it proves effective in hepatitis-C .
Historical report says that the death rate in this disease has been from 5 . % to 33 % .
CDC has said that the death rate is considered to be 15 .
While the WHO has said in a fact sheet issued in 2001 that 15 % patients enter a toxic stage in which half of them die and half are saved .
Yellow fever has an very important place in the history of Afric , America , Europe and the Caribbean Islands .
Yellow fever spread the worst in 1978 in the United States due which 20 thousand had died in Mississippi valley itself .
Naturopathy is a medical-philosophy .
The basis of treatment of diseases and health recuperation under naturopathy is - the natural strength of the body to fight disease molecules .
There are several methods under naturopathy . such as - water therapy , homeopathy , sun therapy , acupuncture , acupressure , soil therapy etc .
The contribution of several medical therapies are there in the propagation of naturopathy . such as the Ayurveda of India and the Nature Cure of Europe .
Naturopathy is a creative method of treatment , the goal of which is to end the root cause of disease with the use of available elements .
This is not just a treatment method but a life style according to the internal important powers or natural elements present in the human body .
In this natural treatment method natural food , specially fresh fruits and raw or lightly cooked vegetables play conclusive role in the treatment of different diseases .
Naturopathy is a total revolution in life style and science .
Naturopathy is a special boon for the poor persons and the poor nations .
Abnormal state of any part of skin is called skin disease .
Skin is the biggest system of the body .
This occurs due to direct contact with external environment .
Besides this the diseases of several other systems of parts  such as piles  are expressed through the skin itself .
Chikungunya is a long extending disease of the joints .
A great pain occurs in the joints in Chikungunya .
The aggressive stage of Chikungunya goes on for 2 to 5 days only but the pain of joints continue for months or weeks .
Chikununya virus is an arbovirus that is considered to be of the family of alphavirus .
Chikungunia enters into human through the bite of aedes mosquito .
It takes 2 to 4 days for Chikungunia to spread after entering into body .
The patients of Chikungunia can have acute joint pain for a long time that depends on their age .
Chikungunia disease spreads in the cycle of human-mosquito-human .
The virus of chikungunia is found mainly in monkeys but other species including humans can also be affected from it .
The most effective way of safety from the disease of chikungunia is to escape coming in contact with disease carrying mosquitoes .
There is no treatment for chikungunia nor is there any vaccine available against it .
Chloroquine is proving effective against the symptoms of chikungunia .
Kidney stones is a disease of the urinary system in which small stone like hard things form inside the kidney .
Generally these stones are flushed out from the body through the urinary passage .
But if they grow enough  2-3 mm in size  then these can create blockage in the urinary tract .
Stone is found normally in the people of the age of 30 to 60 years .
Stone is found four times more among men than in women .
Stone of bladder forms more in children and old people while in adults stone form mostly in kidney and urinary tract .
The most regrettable thing is that only a few percent patients of stone get it treated .
The patients having diabetes have a good chance of catching the disease of kidney .
If a patient has the disease of blood pressure then he should pay attention on controlling blood pressure with regular medicine .
Because if blood pressure increases kidneys may also malfunction .
State of pain in case of stone in kidney .
In stone a sudden pain occurs in the lower part of the back or abdomen which goes up to the joint of the abdomen and thighs .
The pain of stone stays for some minutes or hours and relief comes intermittently .
There can also be complaint of nausea along with pain and vomiting .
If there is an infection in a part related to urinary system then fever , shivering , perspiration , pain along with urine etc . may also be included in the symptoms .
Blood also may come in urine .
Most of the patients of stone in kidney complain of acute pain starting from towards the abdomen .
This pain arises intermittently and stays for from a few minutes till several hours , this is called renal chronine .
The chief symptom of stone disease is that in it the pain starts from the lower part of the back and goes towards thighs .
Stone of the kidneys are diagnosed by complete medical test , X-ray-sonography , dye injection or ultrasound tests .
Some solutions of safety from stone .
Drink plenty of water so that 2 to 2 . litre of urine forms everyday .
There should be less amount of protein , nitrogen and sodium in diet .
Do not take such materials which has more amount of oxalate . such as chocolate , soyabean , almond , spinach etc .
Avoid Coca-Cola and other such beverages .
Heavy amount of vitamin-C should not be taken .
The danger of stone is less with the juice of orange etc .
Different kinds of stones , some out of which are made of calcium and some of uric acid .
The meaning of organ transplant is to transplant a healthy and functional organ from a body in the place of a damaged or unsuccessful part of another body .
Transplanting an organ of a patient into another organ of the same patient also comes under the category of organ transplant .
Organ donator can be both alive or dead .
Among the transplantable organs are included heart , kidney , liver , lungs , pancreas , penis , eyes and intestine .
Transplantation medicine is one of the most challenging and complex areas of modern medical discipline .
Unacceptance of transplanted organ by the body is among some of the biggest problems of the medical management area .
Where the immune system of the body rejects the transplanted organ by reacting against it and because of this transplant becomes unsuccessful and now a big challenge for the transplant medicine is to keep the transplanted organ active in the same body .
Transplantation is a very time sensitive process .
Bones , tendons , cornea , heart valves , veins , arm and skin are included among the tissues that can be transplanted .
There is a lack of suitable organs for transplant in most of the countries .
There is a formal system to alleviate risks of unacceptance and to manage allocation in most of the countries .
Some countries are attached to international organizations such as Eurotransplant so that the supply of organs can be assured .
Transplantation also brings some life ethical issues to the fore such as definition of death , when and how an agreement is to be given for an organ and payment for the used organ in transplant .
Amoeba dysentry disease emerges from a special kind of microbic bacteria called Entamoeba histolytica .
Entamoeba is present in the large intestine of the body in two forms .
These forms are called cyst and ova .
Humans takes it inside the body in the form of cyst through food items and beverages .
This cyst sometimes takes the form of eggs on entering the large intestine .
Among the main symptoms of dysentery patient has diarrhoea along with an acute form of stomach ache and an acute convulsion occurs near the anus .
On diagnosing such patients a tenderness is found in caecum and the left iliac region and some fever also occurs .
Flies are extremely helpful in spreading dysentery .
Toilet occurs 12 to 24 times or more a day and most of the part of the excreta is mucus and thickened blood .
Sometimes this amoeba enters the portal vein and creates epatitis and abscess blisters .
Abscess is a serious type of fatal disease .
When the abscess blasts then as a result its pus creates several fatal diseases on entering lungs , stomach , large intestine , peritoneum and pericardium .
Among the main symptoms of abscess there is an acute pain in the liver part of the patient which sometimes spreads to the right shoulder .
Besides this headache , shivering and fever also reach their pinnacle .
Patient feels acute pain and burn on just touching the liver part and the skin above it becomes sensitive .
To avoid abscess all the food items and beverages should be kept away from flies .
The person from whose excreta the cyst comes out should not do any work of the kitchen until blood and phlegm has stopped coming through excreta .
The patient of dysentery should eat barley .
If the power of eyes is more then one should wear contact lens .
Contact lens should be of high quality .
Washing eyes regularly is a good habit .
When the mucus has stopped coming out then the patient of dysentery can be given thin tapioca pearls  sabudana  arrowroot , rice , curd etc .
For good health of the eyes one should have vitamin-A rich diet .
The health of eyes remain good with regular yoga as well .
Your eyes are priceless , protect it .
The most common tumors found in women are swelling of the uterus glands , fibroid or leiomyoma .
This knot is found in approximately 30 to 40 % women .
This fact has come forward from regular sonography .
In many cases this does not produce any symptoms but in many cases this becomes reason for pain , bleeding and infertility .
Predominantly this is seen in women of 30 - 40 years of age .
Young girls also get infested with this at times .
The size of the swelling decreases after menopause .
But after taking hormone therapy the size may increase again .
This disease is found more in women of dark complexion in comparison to women of fair complexion .
The possibility of the occurrence of this increases if there are no or few children .
This disease is seen less also in women who use pills for family planning .
The danger of fibroid increases in menarche at young age .
If mother , sister etc . in the family have fibroid tumor then the possibility of the occurrence of this increases .
The danger also increases with the consumption of alcohol , cigarette and meat .
Vegetarianism helps in being saved from fibroid .
This is the tumor of muscles and fibrous tissues .
Approximately 20 - 30 % fibroids are symptom less .
Unusual , excessive bleeding , pain during menses .
Pain in abdomen , pain of waist .
Infertility due to knot inside uterus .
Symptoms due to pressure - difficulty in micturition .
Need of delivery with operation .
Anemia due to excessive bleeding post - delivery .
Difficulties occur many times in the cure of fibroid .
The uterus also increases in ovarian tumor - endometriosis , pregnancy adenomyosis etc .
Important tests .
Sonography , through abdomen and vagina .
The presence of swelling glands only is not a prerequisite for its removal .
If the submucos fibroid is small then it can be removed through hysteroscopic uterine endoscopy .
The submucos fibroid can also be removed with laser .
Before the removal of intramural fibroid it is seen what is the age of the woman , whether there are children or not , whether the family is complete or not , what does the female want .
Myomectomy operation can be carried out through hysteroscopy or laparoscopy or laprotomy  opening the abdomen  .
Only the tumor is taken out in case of young women who do not want more children .
If the age is not less , the tumor is quite big and there is no need for children then the whole uterus is removed together with the knot , hysterectomy .
By putting a pipe through the thigh artery in laparoscopic myolysis , the uterine artery is blocked by putting poly vinyl and gel foam particles .
The supply of blood reaching the swelling glands gets stopped through this and the swelling glands reduce up to 60 % .
Breast cancer is a dreadful name for women .
Thousands of deaths occur due to cancer being not recognized in initial days .
In cancer maximum people break down mentally and financially .
If breast cancer is recognized in the initial condition itself then its treatment is possible without any physical deformity .
At the same time cent percent patients can be ridden from the disease also .
Thus lacs of women and families can be saved from mental and financial agony .
In present times due to changes in social and living habits etc cancer is spreading very fast .
Till date many methods of cancer test like mammography , MRI , CT scan etc are helpful though but somehow or the other the side effects of radiation is seen in these .
In this condition the doctors have got hold of a new weapon - infrared thermography .
In infrared thermography , breast cancer due to ill effects of lethal radiation can be tested as fast as possible .
Greek and Egyptian doctors were aware of the disease of breast cancer and temperature of the body .
Sir William Harchell discovered infrared and thermal radiations in 1800 AD .
But till 1970 it was not certain that infrared could be used in the field of medicine .
Breast thermography helps in the detection of cancer in its very initial days .
Lacs of women can be benefitted from breast thermography .
The use of infrared thermography can be done in the detection of arteries being narrow as well etc . in diabetes .
If there is swelling in brain , brain tumor or meningitis in brain then the pressure of intracranial veins increases .
If there is rheumatoid arthritis or spondilitis then swelling occurs in eyes .
The effect of blood pressure on eyes is huge .
Due to blood pressure the veins of the eyes may be blocked or else bleeding can occur .
Due to this the eye sight may go even .
All the diseases of kidney and head can be diagnosed through eyes easily .
Anything altered on eyes has direct impact on kidney .
How much diabetes damages our body , even this can be diagnosed through eyes alone .
By taking the medicine chloroquine , the eye sight can completely go .
Eye sight can weaken due to Viagra .
If someone has diabetes then he must go to the doctor even if there is no eye problem .
The eyes of children after four years must be tested .
If there is any problem in his eyes then that can be corrected with this .
In small kids if there is any complaint of eye squint then many times it can be corrected even without surgery .
With age the eyes should certainly be tested at least once in a year .
If having vision syndrome then the person must get the check up done continuously .
Do not put any medicine in the eyes without consulting the doctor .
If anyone 's paternal uncle , maternal uncle , father or mother have cataract then the check up must be done regularly .
Due to cataract the pressure of the eyes can increase because of which the veins can be spoiled .
Many times cataract comes fast in the eyes .
Never look towards sun with naked eyes .
There is always a need to protect eyes from the ultraviolet rays of the sun .
The eye sight does not increase by walking on green grass .
Green grass only provides freshness or coolness to the feet .
Reduction in the power of eyes by using spectacles or increase by not using , this never happens .
Our eyes do not get spoiled by TV , computer or less light .
No type of exercise can increase the eye - sight .
The word ' arthritis ' means ' the swelling of joints ' and more than even 100 types of joint swellings have been put under the category of arthritis .
At any age arthritis disease can take one in its captivity .
Arthritis disease has been seen in kids as well .
This disease is a common thing in people of 50 years and above .
In people of 50 years and above this disease also happens in serious and more painful condition .
As the age increases , the cases of arthritis also increase .
3 persons out of every 5 below 65 years of age have been seen to be patients of arthritis .
If the cure and treatment of arthritis is not done on time then it causes great damage to the joints and bones of the body .
Although arthritis is a disease affecting women world wide .
In our country this disease affects women even more because of special actions like sitting down for toilet or sitting down on floor for domestic work .
The knee joint is actually the joint between the thigh bone  femur  and the bone of foot  tibia  .
The cartilage once destroyed may not be corrected again by any medicine .
Because of the reason of damage happening in cartilage the patient suffering from arthritis also faces problem in activities like walking , climbing up the stairs and sitting down or taking bath while sitting down .
If the correct cure of arthritis is done in time then relief to a great extent from this disease is possible .
Fast treatment means less damage to the joints and because of this the patient has to suffer less pain .
Generally the advice of surgery is also given on arthritis becoming serious .
In patients where arthritis has reached the preliminary stage , for patients in whom alternatives like unicompartmental knee resurfacing and hip resurfacing are very beneficial .
Total hip  knee replacement  TKR  is useful in case of arthritis affecting the entire joint .
TKR does not mean that the knee of patient is removed and metal implant is fixed .
In TKR new surface is put at the end of the bones .
The newest alternative in knee implant is rotating platform high flexion knee , due to which in all activities like walking , bending during gardening , sitting for driving or exercising , climbing down the stairs the patient gets comfort .
With high flexion knee bending up to 155 is possible .
Much more satisfaction is felt by patients who have already got rotating platform high flexion knee implant and they are able to fulfil the activities of daily life in a better way .
By adopting good habits of proper medical care , surgical alternatives and balanced life style and proper food habits one can to a great extent get rid of an epidemic like arthritis .
Apart from medicine and surgery balanced food also plays an important role in dealing with arthritis in a proper way .
Increase the quantity of vitamins , minerals , anti oxidants and other nutritive substances and by doing this you can keep your weight under control .
The situation of arthritis becomes grave when weight increases .
Eat more and more fresh fruits and vegetables especially eat more fruits containing VitaminC like apples , oranges , cherries , peppers , tomatoes , beet roots , sweet potato etc so that the joints can stay protected .
With fibrous food like whole grain , barley and brown rice , help can also be obtained in keeping healthy physique especially joints .
Keep away from taking fried food .
More and more calcium rich food must be consumed .
Calcium rich food keeps the bones protected .
By doing regular exercises also the muscles around the joints is made strong .
If there is any wart , knot or wound on any part of the body and still does not dry up quickly then be cautious , this can be skin cancer .
Cancer of the skin generally appears in the form of a small knot .
This knot can appear at any place like hand , leg , face etc .
The knot can be of normal color or else of black color .
In preliminary stage the knot is painless and because of this reason we commit grave mistake .
Because of no pain in the knot the patient does not give attention to the treatment of the knot .
With the increase of knot it starts paining .
Many times cancer appears in the form of a small wound .
The wound does not pain if there is cancer .
The cancer of the wound goes on increasing and at one stage pain occurs in that .
Many times cancer appears in non dangerous knots .
Therefore , do not forget any knot .
If there is non dangerous knot in the body then be cautious of the following symptoms .
Wound forming in the knot .
Knot increasing rapidly .
Pain in the knot .
Colour change in the knot .
Cancer of any part of the body spreads through blood and lymph vessels .
That cancer which spreads through blood is more dangerous .
Cancer of skin generally spreads through lymph vessels .
Therefore cancer of skin spreads slowly .
Treatment of skin cancer is done by cutting the cancer infested skin .
With cancer infested skin healthy skin is also removed by cutting because of which chance of cancer being left back ends .
At times lymph glands are also cut and removed with cancerous skin .
It depends on the rapidity of cancer whether the cancerous glands should be cut and removed or not .
The cancer of the skin of the reproductive organs is different from the cancer of skin of other organs .
Other diseases of reproductive organs increase due to hesitation and their proper treatment does not take place .
In situation of cancer of female reproductive organs , the skin of the reproductive organ is cut and removed .
If the cancer has spread up to lymph glands then the lymph gland is also cut and taken out .
Definitely get every knot occurring on the skin checked up .
If there is any knot from several years then in the situation of increase in the knot getting checked up is must .
If pain occurs in the knot of skin then be attentive and definitely get the cancer test done .
If wound occurs in the knot then also being cautious is important .
Every such wound occurring on skin which does not heal in 2 weeks points towards cancer .
There is a natural course for good growth and development of child , believes the paediatrician Dr . Kumar .
At times due to less food intake reduction in weight or reduction in activity is indeed a normal symptom .
Taking child ' s health in concern much anxiety should not be shown .
Not making the upbringing a worry , every effort must be tried to spend more and more joyous moments with the child .
This fact has only come forward after doing survey that those mothers who move around their children are more sensitive towards their health .
Those children generally grow less in comparison to other children of their own age .
Therefore take only that much care of child as much is needed .
Any time if the child is ill or is sad due to any reason then also do not show restlessness all of a sudden .
Seeing the situation do not let the patience and faith falter .
Not just physical , but in mental and emotional make up also there is difference in the structure of man and woman .
According to statistics though the disease of men are deep but their number is less .
In women the number of healthy women is less in proportion to men .
The number of unhealthy women is more .
The disease of women are related more to their stomach , uterus , reproductive organs etc .
At the time of reproduction the carelessness in breast feeding or conception only proves fatal for women in future .
Little attention , little bit of awareness and little knowledge can save women from many diseases .
There are many diseases in women about which they themselves also do not know .
To such women only the organization ' Bombay Health Guide ' tells in detail about their diseases and getting saved from them .
Maximum disease in women is related to uterus .
Majority of women feel shy , hesitate while talking to their doctor about their uterus and reproductive organs .
Many times women living especially in villages , slums , hutments , chawls , eat medicine on their own , do domestic treatment , which many times proves fatal .
Eating anything by one 's own wish can prove dangerous and fatal .
In every village hospitals and government dispensaries are available where advice and medicine is obtained for free .
The diseases which occur mainly in women , they are - asthma , swelling in uterus or excessive blood flow , infection of reproductive organs or breast cancer .
At present breast cancer is a major disease .
The rapidly increasing number of the disease of breast cancer is a subject of concern for the entire country .
According to a publication by Indian Breast Cancer Association the proportion of women with cancer is more in western countries .
There are also measures to stop and reduce breast cancer .
Breast cancer can not be stopped but a yoke can be put on its growth .
Together with the Indian Government , the WHO is also very effortful in this direction .
According to WHO of all the patients of breast cancer 80 % are those who did not feed their child from their breast after child birth .
When a newborn baby has milk from the breast of his mother then for the baby it is having elixir .
Together with this he also saves his mother from many diseases .
Breast feeding is not just a life saving elixir but it is also a life savior for the mother .
The number of diseases occurring in women is not less but one can be saved from them .
For all this what is most important is awareness in women , being attentive towards own health .
The efforts of WHO is working at a large scale in the world and it affirms that in coming years by making women aware they can be saved from several main diseases .
Urine infection occurs commonly by peeing in public toilets , drinking less water and not cleaning the genitals properly .
The deformed type of urine infection is swelling in the vagina and complication in urinating .
The reason of burning sensation is increase of E coli bacteria only .
The main symptoms of urine infection are .
Burning while urinating and blocked flow .
Swelling and reddening of the organ .
Pain and burning in urine track .
Escape from using public toilets .
Escape from dirty , wet undergarments .
Escape from using dirty hands .
Drink enough water .
Use of clean clothes .
Consumption of green vegetables and fruits .
Loyalty towards partner .
Rice is very qualitative .
Rice is light and easily digestible .
Eating freshly cooked rice is advised .
If eaten less chapatti at dinner and eaten rice daily then this light food can keep your health good .
Rice is acidity killer , easily digestible , that which increases blood in body and is proper diet in diarrhoea and dysentery .
Three year old rice is very tasteful and that which produces glow .
Rice should be eaten with rice water .
By removing rice water the protein , minerals , vitamins come out and this is called waste food .
Rice water means the dense white water while cooking rice .
It has protein , vitamins and minerals which is beneficial for health .
Milk should be mixed in rice and left covered for 20 minutes , those whose stomach is weak or who can not digest food easily , make them eat this then it will be soothing .
Rice has medicinal uses also , it is beneficial in many diseases .
Consumption of boiled rice water without juice of lemon and salt less or mustard seed in vinegar is beneficial in burning in chest or stomach , gonorrhoea , chicken - pox , measles , urine infection .
The body gets strength , intelligence increases and digestion stays good by having ghee mixed in porridge made by mixing and cooking rice , pulses  especially moong  , salt , chilly , asafoetida , ginger , spices .
In dysentery the patient must be fed with rice cooked like paste by mixing cow milk in it .
If the stomach is not clear then by mixing milk and sugar and having it , the stomach gets cleared by dysentery .
If there is tendency for dysentery then by having rice mixed with curd it stops .
If the intoxication due to bhang is more then the intoxication vanishes by having water which has been used to wash rice and adding two pinches of edible soda and sugar .
The drink made by mixing water in which rice has been washed , edible soda and sugar , becomes useful in urine infection .
Have 25 grams rice pod mixed with honey before sunrise and go to sleep .
In one week hemi cranial pain will go away .
Grind paddy root in rice washed water and sieve it then make its drink by mixing honey in it . This is a harmless and safe contraceptive .
Benefit happens in loose motions by putting a coat of onion juice on navel .
In complains of indigestion have onion juice by adding little bit salt .
By having honey in white onion juice is beneficial in asthma disease .
By having honey mixed in onion juice the lack of blood in body is removed .
If the rheumatic pain becomes torturous then massage with onion juice .
The patients suffering from high blood pressure must eat raw onion because it reduces blood pressure .
If vomiting or nausea is happening then relief is obtained by having onion pieces by putting salt on it .
Those who have perpetual mental tension , they must eat onion .
If there is toothache then press a small piece of onion under it , you will get relief .
Eye sight is improved by consuming onion .
A special chemical present in onion is helpful in reducing mental tension .
Have boiled whole grains in breakfast , consume cake made of wheat flour , wheat flour has sufficient magnesium .
Have 50 grams of curd with two potato parathas , this is a good source of energy .
Roast one handful of peanuts and consume it as breakfast with 10 grams of jaggery , this is a sufficient source of energy .
Often change of water leaves a bad impact on body .
Also by drinking common salt water heat does not trouble much .
If you have bile complaint then mix and keep sea salt and carom seeds . Eat two - three times .
To escape from loo cover and keep an onion in your pocket or purse . By repeatedly smelling it loo will not affect .
Eat as less as possible , still if there is indigestion , eat trikuti powder with honey for this in the morning .
If your eyes redden rapidly then keep eye cleaning lotion and cotton also with you .
For long , disease free and healthy life nutritional and Satvik food is essential .
The secret for disease free healthy and long life is nutritional and Satvik food .
After the secret of nutrition , to get rid of mental tension and taking in positive energy is very essential for long life .
Sitting alone in a comfortable condition and breathing slowly man should feel that all tensions are going away from the mind .
Wash out all the symptoms of old age from your mind and feel that you are young .
After getting rid of all tiredness feel that I am completely away from negative stress and positive power has come in me completely .
Keep in mind that positive thought by pacifying heart and mind releases youth in body .
There itself negative thought increases the process of ageing and decreases life .
Not doing abstinence in food , not cleaning teeth before sleeping , the stomach not staying clean and due to perpetual constipation odour comes from mouth .
Cleaning teeth by making a brush of soft branch of neem or acacia removes odour .
Mouth is freshened by chewing 5 grams aniseed or coriander or cardamom .
It is beneficial to chew paan by putting cardamom and mint .
Gargling with the solution made by putting cardamom , cinnamon and dried mint leaves destroys odour .
Chewing cardamom also prohibits odour .
Gargling by putting 2 . drops of cumin seed oil in one cup of water is beneficial .
Brushing with date stone ' s powder also destroys odour .
Reiki destroys the cause of disease from roots .
Worry , anger , greed , excitement and tension produces chaos in the organs and nerves of our body because of which many kinds of ailments occur in our blood vessels .
Physical disease is a result of these deformities .
Physical diseases are affected by mental diseases .
The symptoms of disease are excessive worry , sadness , remorse , depression , being seen more happy than needed , speaking more or staying completely silent , doubting , attempts to commit suicide .
Reiki is even capable of curing arthritis , asthma , cancer , blood pressure , palsy , ulcer , acidity , stone , piles , diabetes , sleeplessness , obesity , diseases of liver , diseases of eyes , gynaecological disease , infertility , powerlessness , madness .
The disease does not come suddenly in one day .
It is possible to cure all the diseases through reiki apart from congenital diseases .
Reiki destroys the disease from the root , uplifts the health standards , does not suppress the symptoms of the disease .
Mental emotions are balanced and one gets rid of physical tension , restlessness and pain .
In heart everyone has the desire to become a good reiki channel .
Mental peace and life generating power are needed to become a healer .
The meaning of healing is riddance from disease and the meaning of healer is that person who possesses the ability to cure diseases through supernatural power .
The healer treats the diseased man through energy of hands .
Tactile waves make the patient healthy .
Qualities like devotion , faith , intimacy , endurance and practice are required then only he can become a successful healer .
The powerful energy released through expert hands of reiki guru meaning reiki grandmaster is called attunement .
Reiki attunement is done in every course .
The student gets connected to the omnipresent life source after attunement .
Reiki is a heavenly power which fills the hands of the channel with life .
Reiki guru connects the student with the universal energy force through the attunement and his life gets transformed .
The more sensitive the man is faster he gets connected to the heavenly power .
Reiki attunement can also be done distantly .
The master who has the ability to make reiki master is called reiki grandmaster .
The highest course of reiki is reiki grandmastership .
Hundreds and thousands of students learn reiki but only those reach to the heights of reiki grandmastership who participate in , spread and advertise practice of reiki with full enthusiasm .
Several symbols to increase power and energy is taught in reiki course .
Many symbols to activate agyachakra and to increase knowledge , wealth , victory , expression , completeness , love and attentiveness are taught .
To establish reiki energy in water is taught .
The Greek and American styles of winter cycle is taught .
The magnetic power of eyes is developed through tratak action .
To make master grid , to do community treatment , knowledge attunement and memory attunement are taught too .
Reiki is a spiritual meditation in which there is growth of peace , balance and patience and the sense of duty towards mankind increases after becoming reiki grandmaster .
Every fifth person in India is a heart patient .
There is always a dilemma for heart patients as to which type of food they should eat and which type of food they should forsake .
In this relation heart disease specialists believe that the patients should take special advice in their food habits .
Consumption of high cholesterol is dangerous for heart patients .
Heart patient should use less salt , chilli and fried food or if possible should not use it .
The consumption of green leafy vegetables and fruits should be done in increased quantity .
If the heart patient consumes cigarettes , alcohol or other intoxicating substances then he should immediately stop consumption of these substances .
Heart patients should eat ghee , butter , etc as less as possible .
Heart patients should eat raspberry and garlic everyday .
Heart patients should especially consume apple jam .
The heart patient must include light exercises and morning walk in his daily routine .
The heart patient should stay happy and should meditate for mental peace .
Heart patients should not worry much .
When you do not consume fibrous substances in your food and get up after eating fast then disorder occurs in digestive process .
In busy times of today people ignore fibrous food in their intake , although constipation occurs due to the lack of fibrous food .
That part of cereal , fruit , leafy vegetable , bread , beans , and edible items is called fiber which without getting digested and absorbed come out of the stomach , due to this reason the cleansing of stomach and intestine can easily be done .
Many types of other serious problems get averted by consuming fibers which do not stick in the intestine .
In stomach disorder and constipation the internal surface of intestines gets destroyed and small pouches build up .
The high quantity of fiber helps in reducing excess pressure around the intestines .
By eating fibrous food the faeces becomes soft and comes out easily .
Fibrous substances also protect from piles .
There is control on gas formation in stomach .
The food gets digested in a good way and the body gets energy , therefore fibrous substances are essential in food .
Some people take energy rich food to maintain health .
Some people use medicines to remove weakness .
The energy received through medicines is not permanent , the energy received through natural ways , that is food , is permanent .
If you take raw vegetable salad with your meal then it will be the best meal .
There is huge store of natural minerals in raw vegetables , if they are eaten in this way only then their nutrition is not destroyed .
You can add curd , lemon , salt and honey , together with it , jaggery , raisins , grape juice or whole grapes , coriander , mint or you also can use seasonal fruits in order to make vegetable salad tastier .
Fresh vegetables and fruits should be used for salad so that their natural quality is not destroyed .
Use leafy vegetables only in vegetables , leaves should be clean , should be untorn and flawless .
Only three or four items should be there in salad , if there are more items then the true taste of salad gets spoilt .
The eye sight increases by mixing and eating one spoon of pure ghee , one spoon of grinded sugar , quarter spoon grinded black pepper on an empty stomach and after licking it and drinking warm sweet milk before sleeping time .
By drinking one glass of sweet milk after adding one spoon of ghee , the dullness and weakness of the body goes away , sound sleep comes , bones become strong and smooth toilet comes in the morning .
Potency increases and thinness goes away by using it in winter days .
Make laddoos by mixing equal quantities of ghee , black grams ground with peel and ground sugar  powder  .
Relief is obtained in the disease of menorrhagia in women by eating a laddoo by nicely chewing it and drinking one glass of sweet warm water in gulps early morning on an empty stomach .
Get 11 kilograms of gram and wheat grinded after mixing them and use the flour without sieving it .
Food has many such substances using which everyday one can be saved from heart disease and heart stroke .
Onion - it can be used in the form of salad .
The flow of blood stays good by the use of onion .
Onion is very useful for those who get anxious due to weak heart or whose heart beat increases .
The danger of heart disease reduces by eating tomatoes .
Abundant quantity of VitaminC , beta carotene , lycopene , vitamin A and potassium are found in tomato .
With the use of pumpkin the level of cholesterol starts coming to the normal condition .
Juice of pumpkin freshly taken out and 4 mint leaves and two leaves of basil put in it should be drunk two times a day .
Garlic - Use this in food . There is also benefit by swallowing two pieces with water in the morning on an empty stomach also causes benefit .
Carrot is very beneficial in reducing the increased heart rate .
Drink honey by adding lemon juice two - three times a day .
Honey is one such material which on mixing with blood gives energy to the body .
Heart gets power from honey .
In slight anxiety one will get quick relief on taking lemon and honey .
The bark medicine of Arjun is very useful in heart disease .
The problems like swelling of the heart , rapidity of heartbeat , blockage of vessels etc is removed by the powder of the bark of Arjun .
Together with reducing cholesterol the juice of lime also cleanses the dirt present in it .
There is benefit in heart disease by eating a pomegranate or having juice of pomegranate everyday .
After feeling stiffness in chest or heaviness while taking breath one gets relief by consuming juice of ginger with honey .
If there is heart disease , apart from maintaining precaution in food , you can take natural treatments like - scientific massage , local steam , cover of chest , enema , sun bathing , light steam bath etc in the hospital .
Also do Yogic treatment and pranayams of Anulom - Vilom , Bhramari , Bhrasika .
Snoring is a common disorder .
Maximum people do not consider snores as disease .
The truth is that snores taken while sleeping not only produce noise but during this breathing also stops for a while in the person .
This condition is called ' sleep apnia ' .
Sleep apnia can also be fatal .
Why do snores come ?
Snoring is a common problem .
If the statistics are to be believed then in the entire world more than one third of the total population is infested with this problem .
The problem of snoring is seen in people of every age from childhood to old age and both men - women come in this .
How does the problem of snoring become fatal .
Reason , symptoms , cure and faultless treatment .
There are mainly three states of snoring .
Normal condition - in this state of snoring at the time of taking breath while sleeping , the breathing stops around eight times for ten seconds in one hour .
The condition of disease is called general sleep apnia .
If one has eaten more food then one can give stomach relief by drinking soda .
You get more burps with soda bubbles because of this the acid of the stomach again starts flowing towards throat .
In place of this loosen the belt of waist if you have eaten more because this may become the reason for increased pressure on your belly .
Do not lie down immediately after eating , complain of heart burn can occur .
The complain of heart burn can occur due to lying down .
Because it takes several hours for food to go to intestines after getting digested in stomach .
Do not bend downwards for a while after eating , the eaten things come to the throat .
Take antacid before sleeping .
Liquid antacid works fast .
If gas is blocked in stomach then lightly massage the stomach and foment that place with hot water bottle or by lightly warming cotton cloth .
Ayurvedic doctor Dr . Ashwini Kumar A . Raut advises to drink the solution of aniseed , cumin seed and salt .
Suck ginger in indigestion .
According to Dr . Raut , the medicinal extract made by mixing ginger , juice of lemon and little bit of salt is more beneficial .
It is beneficial to suck lemon in nausea but only when nausea is with acidity .
It is better to suck ginger in motion sickness  nausea which happens when sitting on a ship or bus or while swinging on a swing  .
Keep your meals light before going on a journey .
Hot brandy containing honey gives relief in cold .
Dr . Raut advises to take fresh basil juice with honey for children .
Hot soup works wonders in cold .
Hot soup opens hair pores , makes sweat and removes cold .
Ginger tea gives relief in cough - cold .
Together with this ginger also has anti - inflammatory properties .
Therefore drink a cup of ginger tea after every two hours .
Warm turmeric milk is beneficial in throat infection .
Turmeric has antiseptic properties .
Warm milk helps in swallowing turmeric .
Do not eat ice - cream , curd and fried things if there is problem in the throat .
The cough gets dense by eating fried things , curd , ice - cream , cold water , banana , custard - apple etc .
Gargle done by salt put in warm water can cure infection of the throat .
By doing gargle with salt mixed warm water not only does the throat infection get healed but studies say that by doing gargle like this daily one can get protected from cough and cold also .
Take water for a while two - three times in the throat .
Turmeric powder heals wounds .
Turmeric is an anti - biotic .
It is difficult to clean the layer of turmeric on the wound and there is the danger of infection .
Calcium carbonate can give rise to infection in skin cuts .
The wound of burns gets healed by raw peel of potato .
The paste of milk and flour ruptures the pimple .
Put on the pimple by making a paste of milk and flour .
Kokum water gives relief in articaria .
Oil of clove gives relief in toothache .
Slightly dip a small piece of cotton in clove oil , do not soak in that .
Do not foment or gargle with hot water in toothache because infection can spread due to this and pain can increase .
Hot rice paste gives relief in joint pains .
The paste of hot rice works on the theory of moist heat therapy and it sucks out pain and stiffness .
Ice pack naturally reduces the temperature of the body .
Ice cubes reduce fever .
Caffeine is stimulant .
Black coffee helps in staying awake till late at night .
Escape from staying awake at night because body needs sleep .
It is good to eat onion sandwich before going for a party but take mouthwash thereafter .
Your stomach stays clean by drinking water after getting up in the morning .
When there is lack of oxygen in the brain then the person becomes unconscious .
From onion there is help in warding off faintness .
Onion has the same effect as the ammonium based salt by which system suddenly gets active .
Headache goes away after drinking water .
People put spoon in patients suffering from epilepsy to prevent tongue damage but on the contrary it can be harmful because teeth can be harmed due to this .
Instead of this make the patient lie down on his side so that breathing becomes easy .
Loosen his clothes and put a pillow under his head .
Drink 8 to 10 glasses of water in a day . Drink juice and clear soup also .
Do not let lack of water happen in summer .
The water of maize hair dissolves the kidney stones .
After nicely washing and mashing boil the hair of maize and after sieving it drink lots of this water .
Food with warming effect must be eaten in winters .
Drink lots of hot soup and eat enough oil rich fruits .
The harsh sound produced due to vibration is only called snoring .
Due to the increase in the blockage of breathing many times the problem of snoring takes a serious form .
The suffering person can not sleep for the entire night and spends the entire night turning sides .
They can also be seen napping during the time of work .
What should you do that the hair does not gray prematurely .
Important information related to cause and cure .
Premature greying of hair .
In the condition of quick greying of hair take both lycopodium and acid phos medicines in 30 - 30 power one after the other .
If the results are not obtained in 3 months then first take lycopodium in 1M power and after 15 days take acid phos in the same power .
If your hair starts greying after any disease then first take natrum myur and afterwards take phosphorus in 3X and 6X power biochemic , for one month , three pills twice a day .
Women in danger of which diseases .
It is important in several respects for women to stay healthy .
The health of family depends on health of women only .
At different stages of age women have to combat different health problems .
In the age of 20 to 30 years women have to face menstruation related problems like excessive or irregular blood flow , painful menstruation , serious pre - menstrual symptoms .
Uterine flow and other uterus related problems are common during this .
Complications like fibroids , endometriosis or polycystic ovaries can be diagnosed with sonography and these can be treated easily .
Mustard strengthens immune system .
According to ayurveda , mustard is fat containing , bitter and spicy , phlegm destroying , bile producing , depression removing , excitement giving to uterus and heart , stomach worms and leprosy removing , itch destroying and freshness giving .
White mustard is considered better instead of red mustard .
Mustard is useful in treatment .
For nutrition - the body of those who consume mustard stew and corn flour chapatti becomes strong .
Those with weak digestion should not consume this .
Cleaning teeth by mixing little bit of salt in mustard oil they become as shiny as pearls .
Teeth do not decay by the daily use of little bit of salt in mustard oil .
Headache goes away and good sleep comes by putting and massaging mustard oil on head .
By adding salt in little bit of mustard oil and filling the mouth for two - three minutes and by spitting thereafter the tongue , the inner portion of cheek , teeth and gums become clean and the odour of mouth keeps going away .
Joint pains are healed by massaging equal volumes of kerosene oil , eucalyptus oil , turpentine oil and chir oil mixed in mustard oil boiled with one onion .
By putting two - three drops of mustard oil in ear , the insect swells and comes out .
That person who daily applies camphor mixed mustard oil in his head , his hair becomes strong .
They do not gray untimely and stay dense .
In Ayurveda there are very effective treatments of psychological diseases .
The most important matter - there are no side - effects of ayurvedic medicines .
What do the texts of Ayurveda say ?
The cure of psychological diseases , analysis and treatment have been described in detail in Ayurvedic texts .
Now the American scientists have made that bone - marrow  pulp of bone  which is almost similar to the bone marrow of man .
The speciality of this bone - marrow is that it can continuously produce red and white blood corpuscles .
Scientists have discovered a new species of bacteria which can pollute raw milk kept inside the fridge .
The use of hormone therapy is generally done to eradicate the problems of women who have got menopause .
The brain of women who take hormone therapy generally starts contracting very fast .
A company of America ' Index Pharmaceuticals ' has developed a gel which can protect women from getting HIV infection .
Life can be in danger if the treatment of hernia is not done .
It is mentionable that approximately 10 % portion of the total population of our country definitely becomes the victim of hernia in their lifespan .
Under the disease of hernia due to congenital or other reasons the production of a saclike creation takes place in a specific organ of the patient due to the bulge of tissues .
Hernia has been mainly divided into three parts .
Orifice , hernia sac and the substance present in it or organs .
Of all the cases of hernia around 75 % are related to stomach .
Maximum cases of hernia are connected to belly meaning stomach .
Inguinal hernia is the bulge connected to inguinal canal of inner walls of stomach .
The operation done for treatment of inguinal hernia is most common .
It is seen 25 times more in men in comparison to women .
Around 10 to 30 % of total cases of hernia related to stomach is of umbilical hernia .
Umbilical hernia generally happens due to congenital complications .
Weakening of walls of stomach is one of the main reasons for hernia to occur .
During the investigation one gets to see swelling or bulge of upper surface of skin in hernia affected areas .
The swelling increases while lifting weight or putting pressure during micturition or defecation .
In some cases swelling can be clearly seen while standing for long or coughing .
Pain occurring due to hernia is very intense .
With the end of day or after physical work intensity of pain increases .
The symptom of inflammation or burn can be seen in the affected area .
The only possible treatment for hernia is surgery .
This surgery famous by the name of hernioplasty can be done with the help of laparoscopy , endoscopy , etc .
Due to the reason of it being minimal invasive surgery , the surgery of the patient is done by putting an incision of two to three mm only .
Just after two - three days of surgery he starts working in normal manner .
If not treated the danger for hydrosil occurring can also be there .
Therefore do not delay if hernia occurs .
Due to obstruction in the intestines because of hernia , the flow of the materials present in them stops .
I know of a middle aged man .
I have been seeing him for 30 years but I have never seen him taking medicine .
Absolutely thick and black hair !
I asked him of the secret of his this immune capacity , then he gave the answer casually . mustard ' .
He is experimenting the same thing from approximately 40 years .
This experiment that in the morning after taking bath he used to fill all the nails of hands and feet including the thumbs with mustard oil .
The plant of mustard belongs to Shakiya species .
The plant of mustard is green and can be 2 . feet long .
The leaves are attached to serrated branches and are smooth .
The flowers are of 4 petals , small and yellow .
The fruit is in the form of pods , which has 10 - 15 seeds .
The seeds are small and round which are identified on the basis of their color .
Mainly only two types of mustards are found , red and yellow .
Sanskrit - Sasharp , Katuk , Sneh , Siddhartha .
Hindi - Sarson . Punjabi - Sarisha . Guajarati - Sarsav . Marathi - Shirsi . English - Sinapis Alba .
Latin - Brassica campestris , family - Cruciferae .
The oil obtained from red mustard is called mustard oil in the market and the oil obtained from yellow mustard is called collagen oil .
Mustard seeds are round as tapioca pearls and are bigger than mustard seeds  Sinapis racemosa  .
The seeds of red mustard are a little blackish brown and are soft and little rough to touch .
The seeds of yellow or white mustard are also of this type .
The branch of the soft plants of mustard are eaten in the form of stew .
Mustard is a plant which is found in entire India .
The useful parts of mustard are leaves , seeds and oil .
According to Ayurveda , Mustard contains oil , is rough , bitter and sharp , kills phlegm and gas , increases bile , is a stealer of pain , provider of excitement in uterus and destroyer of stomach worms and leprosy .
Mustard is anti - itching and an aphrodisiac  increases sexual power  .
White mustard is considered better than red one .
In 100 grams of mustard there is 35 - 48 percent stable oil . . 27 percent volatile oil and 20 percent protein and arusic acid .
The body becomes strong by consuming mustard stew and corn flour bread .
Yes , people with weak digestive system should not consume it .
Cleaning teeth by adding a little bit of salt in oil of mustard they become as shiny as pearls .
The teeth do not decay if this practice is done daily .
Good sleep comes and headache vanishes by massaging head by putting oil of mustard on head .
By applying camphor mixed mustard oil hair does not gray prematurely and stays dense .
By putting one - two drops in ear it  insect  swells and comes out .
The person who puts 1 or 2 drops of the oil of mustard once in a day , his power to hear becomes sharp .
The person who puts camphor mixed oil of mustard in own head , his hair becomes strong .
Bathing with cold water must be done after massaging the whole body with oil of mustard .
There is circulation of energy due to massage .
According to Vastu , mustard can be grown within boundaries of the house .
Almost in every activity of spells mustard is used .
For the patient of leprosy , if they are moved over their own organs after charming the mustard seeds with spells for curing snake bites then spread of leprosy stops .
The unique use of oil of mustard - if in a vessel with broad mouth water is filled completely and put in the bedroom .
If 4 . drops of the oil of mustard are put in that , then mosquitoes do not come close .
This is an experiment to shoo the mosquitoes .
Days back a surprising report taking up mental problems was published in a national level newspaper .
According to the report , approximately one fourth of the population of the country suffers from some or the other type of mental problems in their lifetime .
This matter can not be completely true but to consider it a guess will also not be correct .
In order to search luxury and comfort man may be making progress by leaps and bounds but his brain has to bear a lot of harms for this .
Old and aged , children , everyone is suffering from various types of mental tension and are coming in the captivities of psychological disorders .
Even though not all might be taking the advice of psychiatrists or psychologists .
But the number of patients coming to the psychiatrist and psychologists today has increased much than earlier .
The advice of the psychologists is proving ineffective and modern medicines which suppress the symptoms of the problem are delivering more harm .
In the pomp of multimillion advertisements of modern medical science perhaps very few people will accept the truth that methods of effective treatment of common mental problems and severe psychological disorders are present in the ancient Indian medical science , that is , Ayurveda .
The cure , analysis and treatment of psychological disorders are discussed in detail in Ayurvedic texts .
Maharishi Charak tells about three types of diseases in sutrasthan of ' Charak Samhita ' . . nij 2 . aagantu 3 . maanas .
The Nij disorders are those which occur due to the imbalance of tridisorders  gas , bile , cough  .
Aagantu diseases are those which occur due to ghosts  microbes  , polluted air and maanas diseases are those psychological disorders which occur due to desires and jealousy .
As all of you know , Ayurveda is not just the method of treatment , it is also a science of life .
In Ayurveda not just the symptoms of disease are treated but by treating the root cause of disease body is holistically made healthy .
The meaning of complete health is the health of brain and soul together with the body .
If the health of any one of the brain or the soul is not good then it is definite for the health of the other to get affected .
Healthy mind can not reside in unhealthy body .
There are three properties of man - saatvik , rajasik and tamasik , these properties are decided on the basis of balance of tridosh and the entire mental health depends on it .
The nature of man , his judgement and decisive ability , the multiplicity of his character till the extent of the entire personality depends on these three properties of saatvik , rajsik and tamsik properties .
If there is increase in the rajsik and tamsik properties in man due to his food and life style then he can be surrounded with psychological disorders .
According to few specialists , the entire working system of brain depends on the three properties of desire , pride and intelligence .
Desire has control on brain and desire works according to the dictates of pride .
Intelligence which helps the brain to decide is the most important of all .
With the increase of the effect of desire or pride on intelligence , the mental balance disrupts , mental frenzy and tension get incentive and as a result psychological disorders occur .
According to ` Charak samhita ' , in the case of mental disorders , negative effects affect the eight basic psychological causes of will - will , intelligence , memory , feeling , devotion , morality , efforts and behavior .
Due to this reason man does not stay fit for social life .
With the decrease of brilliance in body especially in tissues of brain , the capacity of brain to fight with tension is affected because of which the person gradually becomes prey to the psychological disorders .
This is the reason why together with consumption of nutritive food , excellent digestive capacity is given boundless importance in Ayurveda .
Renowned Yoga and spiritual Deepak Chopra considers ' radiation and life ' also important together with brilliance for mental health .
According to Dr . Chopra , life is that minute energy which is essential in the proper functioning of brain and body .
Radiation is that inner physical strength which by increasing our comprehension power helps us in taking the right decision .
Due to their imbalance also there is maximum danger of becoming the victim of psychological disorders .
One main cause for occurrence of mental disorders for any person is also not being able to strike a proper balance with his surroundings .
In general the main mental disorders that are seen due to this imbalance include hyper sexuality , anger , greed , delusion , jealousy , frenzy , sadness , worry , rage , fear , happiness etc .
If the above mentioned mental condition persists then it gives birth to serious mental diseases like psychosis , epilepsy , hysteria , obsession , illusion , delusion , unconsciousness , excessive alcoholism , etc .
The way in which psychologists and doctors are in dark to a great extent regarding the built and functions of brain similarly all the factors which lead to psychological disorders are not known till now .
Dr . Deepak Chopra says . the greatest effect of our mental health is seen on our body ' .
In the same way the good and bad effects of physical health can be seen on the brain .
In order to escape from such diseases it is important that we learn to strike balance between our body and mind - brain .
Days back one of my highly educated acquaintances came to me for advice .
After knowing the disease symptoms and on the basis of his sonography reports , his family doctor told him that he has hernia and the only treatment for that is surgery .
He had also heard something about hernia .
According to him , this is not a serious problem and just to increase the bill doctors advice for surgery and after surgery also there is a danger for it to appear again , etc .
Seeing the commercialisation in the medical field it was natural for such suspicions to occur .
The information that his physician gave him regarding hernia , it is correct .
Surgery is its only cure and the more the delay the more increased would be the discomfort .
After my advice saying of meeting soon and taking of quick decision in this context he went away .
He got the surgery done afterwards according to his physician ' s consultation or stayed in the maze of third or fourth opinion . do not have any information of this .
It is mentionable that ten percent of the total population of our country certainly falls prey to hernia in its lifespan .
Like the disease hernia construction of a saclike creation takes place from the swelling of tissues in any particular organ of the patient due to genetic or any other reason .
Although hernia can affect just any part of the body but the maximum cases are connected to belly or stomach .
That is , in all cases of hernia approximately 75 % cases are related to stomach .
But in the essay we will discuss in the context of hernia of stomach .
There are three main kinds of this type of hernia too - inguinal hernia affecting the groin region , umbilical hernia affecting the navel region and incisional area rising at the place of surgery of stomach .
Inguinal Hernia : This is a swelling connected to the inguinal canal on the inner walls of stomach and therefore it has been given the name of inguinal hernia .
The case of this is maximum in approximately all cases of hernia .
It is believed that at some time or the other approximately 5 % part of the total population certainly becomes prey to this malfunction .
The surgery done for treatment of inguinal hernia is most common .
Umbilical hernia is related to stomach .
Of all the cases of hernia related to stomach , approximately 10 to 30 % cases are those of umbilical hernia .
Umbilical hernia is generally due to congenital disorders .
In fact one hole of the stomach wall which is connected to the umbilical nerve often gets closed before birth .
In some cases this does not happen because of which hernia erupts near navel center .
If the size of this type of hernia is small , that is , less than half inch then it generally gets closed on its own by the time the child reaches the age of two years .
Large sized hernia which does not stop on their own , surgery is important for their treatment .
This surgery is done between two to four years of age of the child .
In some cases it has been seen that the hole of stomach closes with birth .
But in comparison to other parts of wall of stomach that part is very weak .
Result , the chance of growth of hernia at that place becomes very high .
Incisional hernia . large population has to cross small surgical process of the stomach .
Due to the reason of this surgery for the cracks to appear in the walls of stomach is also common .
Gradually the part of stomach having cracks keeps becoming weak and danger for hernia to grow there becomes very high .
2 to 10 percent cases of a few cases of hernia of stomach are of this type .
Due to the reason of the permanent weakening of walls of stomach there is a chance for hernia to occur once more for second time through surgery .
One of the main causes of hernia to occur is the weakening of walls of stomach .
This problem can occur due to any one or many of the reasons like congenital reasons , due to increasing age , as a result of surgery , strain in muscles during pregnancy , reducing weight fast for decreasing obesity , diseases like marfan syndrome etc .
Excessive pressure inside the stomach is also built due to growth of hydrosil , growth of tumor in uterus , due to pregnancy , etc . because of which the walls of stomach become weak and the danger of hernia increases .
It is very easy to know the symptoms of hernia .
During the examination of the swelled surface in the affected areas one gets to see swelling or rise .
In affected areas the complaint of pain can also occur .
Swelling increases on putting more pressure while lifting weight , micturition or defecation .
Swelling becomes clearly visible in some cases by staying standing for long or coughing as well .
The pain occurring due to the reason of hernia is very intense .
The intensity of pain increases immensely after physical labor or as the day ends .
It is not difficult to recognize the symptoms of hernia .
Generally doctors make an estimate if there is hernia or not through the symptoms told by the patient , his family history and the examination of regions like groin , navel etc .
Apart from it generally there is no need of any other test for the cure of this disease to experienced and specialist doctor .
Where making estimation of the disease is difficult there advice is given to get ultrasound or CAT scan done .
The aforesaid tests are often important for testing the chances of hydrosil .
The only possible treatment of hernia is surgery itself .
Riddance from this problem can be obtained only through surgery .
Famous by the name of hernioplasty this surgery is also done with the help of laparoscopy , endoscopy etc .
In some cases open surgery is also done .
For the treatment of hernia the method of surgery which is brought into maximum use these days , that surgery is laparoscopy .
Due to being minimal invasive surgery , the surgery is done by putting an incision of only 2 . mm to the patient .
As a result the patient starts walking after few hours of surgery .
He gets working in normal way after just two - three days of surgery and within 5 to 7 days he gets to his daily works .
Under this technique of surgery . laparoscope fixed with microscopic camera is made to enter the region of hernia through a small tube .
Surgeon gets helped by means of camera in seeing hernia and the adjoining regions on the video screen .
By means of another tube entered inside the stomach the surgeon rectifies hernia .
The rectification of hernia is done through the posterior part of walls of stomach .
A netted mesh is sewn on the destroyed area of hernia and this way riddance is got from the problem .
With the help of laparoscopy hernia is almost a completely safe process .
Yes , in approximately ten percent cases small complications after surgery are certainly got to be seen .
Generally during hernioplasty there is a danger of infection in the region of surgery , destruction in the adjoining blood vessels and nerves and harm to the nearby organs , etc .
Where the presence of experienced doctor reduces its danger to minimum there a well equipped hospital is capable of controlling them in a better way in case of complication .
As I told you earlier , the only possible treatment of hernia is surgery and because of techniques of minimum incision it is also very safe .
But from fear of surgery or considering hernia as a less serious disease can put the patient ' s life at risk .
It is worth mentioning that hernia is such a problem which does not get cured on its own and it keeps on increasing with time .
If it is left to increase this way then its rectification through surgery becomes comparatively more difficult .
In the situation of no treatment supply of blood gets affected due to blood vessels being pressed or due to obstruction especially in veins because of which there is danger of ischamial nephrosis and gangrene .
Because of hernia due to obstruction in intestines the flow of matter present in them stops .
Consequently tightness , vomiting , release of gas , actions like discharge of faeces may get affected and immediate surgery becomes essential .
In some cases the work efficiency of the organ affected with hernia or its nearby organs get affected and other physical complications start increasing .
With no treatment the danger of hydrosil to happen from hernia can also be there .
Therefore do not delay in hernia .
With delay not just the danger of life risk would increase but comparatively there would also be problems in surgery .
Do you know that if you reduce one pound weight of your body then its direct effect can be seen on your waist .
You will have to reduce or burn 3500 calories for this .
Are you feeling it to be very much .
But the truth is that in the body calorie increases faster than even your thought .
By this calculation for reducing one pound weight in seven days you will need to reduce 500 calories daily .
Easy way is this that divide this quantity into two parts .
Meaning you reduce 250 calorie through diet and rest 250 by doing exercise .
We are giving a diet plan here for this which on practicing you can easily bring reduction in the calorie taken in with the daily food .
Similarly such methods of exercise are being said which will ease your work greatly .
You only have to do this that daily practice on any two suggestions from the food column and one suggestion from the column of exercise given here .
This way you would have reduced 3500 calories after seven days .
Do you want to reduce your 2 pound weight in one weak .
Then you should choose four tips from the daily food column and the alternative to burn 500 calories daily from the exercise 2 column .
This way you will reduce 7000 calories in 7 days , that is . pounds of weight .
Leaving the consumption of eggs and cheese eat only egg white .
In place of pulao of 450 calorie take protein shake of 20 calorie .
Eat half chicken salad sandwich instead of eating full , eat two cups of raw vegetables with it or you can put only one slice instead of two in the sandwich and that also brown bread .
And use cabbage or salad leaf in place of the topmost slice .
Do not use butter and cheese in omelette or sandwich .
Take vegetable soup or rasam in place of cream soup in lunch and dinner .
If you take peanuts in the afternoon then take popcorn in its place .
Reduce one quarter in your breakfast , lunch and dinner .
Instead of eating banana eat apple or guava .
Stop taking any drink which increases calorie like cola , alcohol .
Take black coffee or ice tea without sugar .
Instead of taking chicken cooked in hotel take 3 . cups home cooked steamed vegetables , 100 grams tofu or cheese with 2 spoons of soya sauce .
Abstain from sugar for one day completely : take one serving of cereal full of fiber and do not put sugar on it .
If you take orange juice then eat two oranges in its place .
In place of fried chicken breast eat roasted chicken breast .
In place of eating two cups of cooked carrots eat two cups of cooked cauliflower .
If you have to relish chocolates then put chocolate chips in cereals and puffed rice and eat .
This way you will stay safe from getting 1000 calories from chocolate .
In place of two chocolate chip cookies eat two Marie biscuits .
There are 100 calories in one medium size cookie and no one can restrict after just eating its one piece .
In place of puri , parathe and bhature eat fatless fulke , chapatti , naan and kulche .
Instead of taking faluda or kulfi after lunch take candy ice .
Instead of eating samosa , pakora with tea in the evening it is even better to take idli .
The chutney also of tomato or tamarind is better than coconut .
Although you may be liking fried papad in meal but roasted papad are much better in their place .
In place of biryani , fried rice , pulao try eating lemon rice or eat rice cooked in tomato juice .
At the speed of 10 minutes per mile jog for 20 minutes .
Walk for 20 minutes by constantly decreasing - increasing speed .
Walk briskly for 30 minutes .
Stroll in slow speed for 30 minutes .
Do trail run for 20 minutes .
Do domestic work for an hour .
Walk a mile each in morning and evening .
Do power yoga for 35 minutes .
Do pilates for 35 minutes .
Practice tai chi for 45 minutes .
Improve your game of batting , balling or tennis for an hour .
Box the punching bag for 30 minutes .
Do roller skating for 15 minutes .
Climb up and down the stairs for 15 minutes .
Skip for 20 minutes .
Do circuit training for 25 minutes .
Dance for 40 minutes .
Play Frisbee for an hour .
Walk 3600 steps extra by using pedometer .
Do heavy cardio  elliptical trainer , rowing , machine , spinner  for an hour .
Do power yoga for 70 minutes .
Walk 30 minutes in morning , 15 minutes after lunch and 30 minutes in the evening .
Swim for 45 minutes .
Give an hour to these exercises : skip for 15 minutes at 4 mph speed on the treadmill .
Repeat this action twice .
Do mountain biking for 45 minutes .
Play tennis for an hour .
Diabetes is not a disease which happens only to aged and obese people .
The treatment of diabetes mellitus  sugar found in urine  occurring in children is far more difficult because the treatment of children is done especially by keeping in mind their physical and emotional condition .
In diabetes the quantity of sugar in blood increases immensely because the body fails to produce the insulin being secreted from pancreas .
Diabetes is of two types .
At some point of time type 1 diabetes was called ' juvenile onset diabetes ' .
This is that condition of patient when the insulin is secreted less or not secreted at all . because the immune system attacks the cells of pancreas .
This disease may occur with great speed in the age of 6 to 13 years .
In type 2 diabetes the body does not stay sensitive to the insulin produced inside it .
This disease occurs in extremely obese teenagers who have this disease in their family .
Type 2 diabetes grows gradually .
The symptoms of Type 2 diabetes are frequent micturition , drinking lots of water , dryness of throat , laziness , high pulse rate and blurred vision .
The cure of the disease is ascertained by the test of urine and fasting blood sugar  more than 126 mg  .
For the parents who have children with diabetes keeping their children away from sweets and apart from taking samples to monitor blood sugar seeing them getting injected to take insulin may seem to be very painful but this may have to be done several times in a day .
In such situation they can get great relief from counselling .
You should consider diabetes as an obstinate problem and not a disease whose cure will surely be found some time or the other .
In order to keep the balance of blood sugar level OK the insulin has to be balanced and for this make the children exercise daily .
Together with this give him food of this type which has little carbohydrate , balanced quantity of fat , more fiber and less sodium 6 times a day little by little .
The teachers , family members and kin members should also be aware of his disease .
The young people can fight the disease by taking medicines as advised by the doctor and bringing change in the lifestyle .
For this they should reform the eating pattern , reduce weight and do exercise .
Keep in mind that you have to make your diabetic child as self - dependent as possible so that for him taking injection becomes as easy as brushing teeth .
He can learn to do all these on his own by the time he is of 10 years of age .
When does eye problem occur .
If your child has a problem in doing school work .
If he feels pain in eyes , throbbing pain or tiredness .
He does not see the writing on the black board clearly .
If he brings his book very close to eyes while reading the book .
Then take him to an eye specialist immediately .
Often the teachers of children detect such problems on seeing and make you cautious .
Important information connected to antibiotic .
If your doctor asks you to keep an eye on the symptoms of the disease for 48 hours then follow his advice .
If you are said that the child has to take antibiotics for 5 days and in three days only all the symptoms of disease vanish then also do not stop taking medicine before the completion of 5 days .
This way by stopping the medicine in between the immune capacity of bacteria increases , consequently that problem can again start to grow .
Bhringraj is also called bhangra .
The very small plant of bhringraj is 10 - 12 fingers long .
Bhangra is spread on the ground .
The plant of bhangra grows there where water keeps flowing .
The plant of bhangra is found in great numbers on the banks of streams and rivers .
The small flowers of bhringraj are white in color .
The small flowers of bhringraj are seen from March till September .
Bhringraj is found in the entire India .
The use of the juice of the leaves and branches of bhringraj is very beneficial for the diseases of hair .
One drinks this especially while balding or premature greying of hair .
And this is applied on the balding region .
It is also beneficial in body swelling or the disease of jaundice .
It is also used in the form of chemical .
Migraine is a neurobiological disorder .
The pain of migraine can arise any time in head .
Generally school going girls and working women are more prone to this .
Headache is indeed a very common problem .
When the pain is only in half of the head then it is called half headache or migraine .
This is one of the most common disorders .
Starting from above the eye it becomes constant at a place on the head .
Or goes to the posterior side of the head .
One - third people only take its treatment .
And half of them leave the treatment in between .
Why does it occur .
Tiredness due to work , stress .
Not taking food on time .
By excessive smoking .
Hard smell  of perfume or paint  .
Taking more or less sleep .
Change of weather .
Hormonal change .
Getting hurt on head .
Strain on the eyes , bright light .
Not exercising .
Many people may have problem with strong sunlight , heat or cold .
These are in danger .
Due to changing lifestyle , children are also being prone to migraine .
The tension of studies increases it even more .
15 percent women and 6 percent men have the problem of migraine .
60 percent have pain in half of the head and 40 percent have pain in the entire head .
Migraine can be diagnosed in this way .
Unbearable pain in one portion or entire head .
Blackness in front of eyes , haziness and giddiness .
Onset of nausea and vomiting with intense headache .
Increase in pain due to bright light and the desire to get the lights switched off .
Increase in pain by loud noise and the desire of not talking to anyone .
Fadedness of the color of the things .
Feeling of ants biting in hands and feet .
Increase in pain while rising , sitting and walking .
Migraine generally occurs in the age of 25 - 55 years .
Which the most productive time with respect to career and work .
The pain of migraine is so intense that endurance becomes difficult .
For the patient doing any work becomes very difficult .
It has adverse effect on the efficiency to do work .
The treatment of migraine is done in two ways .
Acute ' treatment is given when seldom the pain occurs so that the attack can be avoided .
This is called ` migraine with aura ' .
In this type of migraine headache can be known before its onset .
50 percent of the total magnesium is found in bones .
And the remaining half is in tissues and organ cells .
Only one percent of magnesium is found in blood .
But to keep the magnesium level in blood constant body has to labor a lot .
It is needed for more than 300 biochemical reactions in the body .
Magnesium helps in keeping the muscle and nerve function normal .
Magnesium helps in keeping blood sugar level regular .
The good sources of magnesium are green vegetables , nuts , seeds , beans , peas , whole cereals .
Gastroenteritis generally occurs because of not paying attention to hygiene and polluted food and water .
If attention is given to hygiene in food habits and life style then gastroenteritis can be prevented to a great extent .
The chances of gastroenteritis highly increases in summer season .
Gastroenteritis occurs due to various reasons , but it generally occurs due to the reason of gastroenteritis bacteria and virus .
Virus and bacteria are very contagious .
These can spread by consuming dirty water and polluted food materials .
This has effect on stomach and intestines , vomiting and dysentery keep coming .
Gastroenteritis happening due to virus can be cured in one to three days .
While if the problem is due to bacteria then cure can take even longer .
These are the reasons .
Dirty and polluted water .
Polluted and rich food .
Where you are having your food , there the place being dirty .
Unhygienic life - style .
It spreads this way .
Gastroenteritis is an infectious disease .
In viral gastroenteritis the loose motion and vomiting are as fluid as water .
The patient also has the complaint of headache , fever and stomach pain .
Symptoms become visible after 1 . days of virus infection .
The food eaten does not get digested .
Frequent vomiting .
Watery dysentery starts coming .
Nauseating tendency and it seems like vomiting .
Feeling more thirsty .
The pulse becomes slow .
Urine becomes less .
There is intense pain in stomach .
Feeling of weakness and unconsciousness comes .
On contracting gastroenteritis there is much vomiting and dysentery .
Together with body water the minerals also come out with vomiting and dysentery .
Therefore there is deficiency of water in body .
Gastroenteritis is a serious disease for those who can not digest anything .
Due to this the danger of dehydration increases in small infants , children and old people .
To prevent gastroenteritis it is important that health authorities should give special attention to hygiene at public places .
Compared to the outer leaves the inner green salad leaves are more nutritive .
Salad leaves are very good source of the hemoglobin found in plants .
The harvest of salad leaves is being done for 2500 years .
Salad leaves are helpful in digestion and are also beneficial for the liver .
Due to the consumption of salad leaves the chances of heart diseases and stroke are lessened .
In some researches it has also been found that salad leaves are also beneficial in cancer .
In salad leaves many minerals and vitamins like calcium , phosphorus , iron , carotene , thymine , riboflavin , niacin are present in very good quantities .
Apart from this protein , fat , fiber and carbohydrate are also present .
If seen from the point of view of calorie then in approximately 100 gram salad leaves there are 21 calories .
The greener the salad leaves the more would be the quantity of VitaminC in them .
Salad leaves have the capacity to destroy disease .
Salad leaves are very good for brain , nervous system and lungs .
The juice of salad leaves is cold and refreshing .
Because of the presence of good quantity of magnesium in the juice of green leafy salad leaves it is considered to be beneficial for muscles and brain .
By mixing the juice of salad leaves with rose oil and massaging on head one gets better sleep and relief from headache can also be got .
Salad leaves also have cellulose due to which it rectifies digestion and may also avert the complain of constipation .
One of the best quality of salad leaves is that it consists of lactucarium which refreshes brain together with increasing sleep as well .
Those people get a lot of relief from this who have the problem of not getting sleep or insomnia .
By drinking the juice of its seed tension goes away and better sleep comes .
This is a very good nutrition to compensate the lack of iron in body .
And it is believed that the iron or ferric material present in it is consumed in the body with great ease instead of any other non - carbonic iron .
During pregnancy too it is very beneficial to eat salad leaf .
In less calorie more nutrition is got from it .
Especially in salad leaf folic acid is found in good quantity which is needed in the body during and even after pregnancy .
Folic acid prevents megaloblastic anemia .
Who have the chances of repeated abortions the advice of eating raw salad leaf is given to them as well .
By eating raw salad leaf the secretion of progesterone hormone in women gets affected too .
By chewing salad leaf immediately after meal one can be cured of several diseases like gingivitis , pyorrhoea , halitosis , stomatitis etc .
Hair fall also reduces by drinking half litre juice of salad leaf or lettuce .
Beans is one such vegetable which is commonly found in food of American , Mexican , Chinese , Japanese , North or South Indian , European types etc .
In homeopathic medicines also beans is of high usefulness .
In some parts of America and Africa beans is considered to be the main source of protein .
In green beans or in common language French beans mainly water , protein , fat , vitamins and minerals like calcium , phosphorus , iron , carotene , thymine , riboflavin , niacin , VitaminC etc are present .
Riboflavin is known more by the name of vitamin B2 .
Vitamin B2 is a very important constituent in the cellular processes of body .
Beans is the main source of vitamin B2 .
Around 26 calories are got per hundred grams of beans .
These are found in more quantity in kidney beans therefore 346 calories are got per hundred grams of kidney beans .
Beans are a good source of soluble fiber and due to this reason it is very beneficial to heart patients .
By eating one cup of cooked beans daily the quantity of cholesterol in blood decreases by 10 percent in 6 weeks .
And by this the danger of heart attack may decrease by 40 percent .
The quantity of sodium in beans is less and the quantity of potassium , calcium and magnesium is more .
This type of composition of minerals is very beneficial for health .
The blood pressure does not increase by this and the danger of heart attack can also be averted .
The ` glycaemic index ' of beans is less , it means this that the way in which level of glucose in blood increases by other food materials .
The fibers present in beans helps in maintaining the level of glucose in blood .
The juice of beans encourages the production of insulin in body .
Those who have diabetes or there is a danger of diabetes , eating beans is very beneficial for them .
French beans is also very beneficial in diseases related to kidney .
Beans also come of big use in homeopathic medicines .
French beans are used in making medicines for rheumatism , arthritis and complications of urinary tract .
The quantity of antioxidants is also huge in beans .
Antioxidants are considered good for the maintenance of cells in body .
Due to the presence of the quantity of phytoestrogen it is thus believed that due to this the danger of breast cancer reduces too .
Eating green vegetables is very beneficial for health .
The tiny beans are things of great benefit for the body .
In one way they work as the energy source for the body .
The quantity of fiber and water is very high and the quantity of calorie is very less in the pods .
In the fruits of wood - apple ` bilvin ' or ` marmesolin ' named element is the main very active constituent .
In the fruits of wood - apple ` bilvin ' or ` marmesolin ' named element is the main very active constituent .
The yellowish - green oil obtained from the fresh leaves is aromatic and bitter in taste .
Its raw fruit is the binder of stimulating bile and is a blood astringent .
Its ripe fruit is bitter , sweet and soft laxative and the sap of its leaves is the one which heals wounds , cures depression , treats fever , cures cold and respiratory disease and reduces glucose in urine .
In indigestion one may get relief by drinking one gram each of black pepper and white rock - salt mixed in ten gram sap of wood - apple leaves .
In the loose dysentery of diarrhoea 5 - 10 grams of wood - apple powder taken with cold water gives relief .
Dry the tablets of raw bael in the sun well or bring the clear variety from the shop keeper .
Grind these finely and fill in the bottles after sieving through cloth .
This only is wood - apple powder .
In the dysentery as well , when teeth comes out in small kids give one pinch of it .
in case of painful eyes , put one - two drops in the eyes after sieving through clean thin cloth .
The affliction in the hurting eyes , pricking and sharp pain get cured and eye - sight will improve .
In case of burns make a paste of wood - apple powder and the heated oil after making it cool .
Instant relief will come by putting paste in the burnt organ .
Because of problem in the digestive system dysentery starts .
Which makes the patient weak and energy less in a short while .
At such a juncture grind wood - apple kernel and mango stone in equal quantities and sieve them .
Take half gram of powder with rice water in the morning .
Take half gram of this powder at every two hours four times on the first day , morning and afternoon on the second day and only in the morning on the third day .
Do not take the powder once dysentery stops .
In case of acidity in stomach and chest due to constipation , make sherbet of twenty five gram grinded sugar candy and two hundred and fifty grams water by mixing in fifty gram pulp .
By drinking daily constipation will go away , glaze will come on the face .
To take out the phlegm in asthma make the soup of wood apple leaves and drink ten grams morning and evening after mixing honey .
In cramp or internal pain , grind the leaves of wood - apple and cook in jaggery .
Make this a hot bandage and tie it on the suffering organ .
By changing the bandage three - four times in a day one can get relief .
By giving fifty gram powder of dried wood - apple leaves with three grams quantity of one spoon of honey or by eating ripe pulp after mixing some cream the problems of urine and sperms get solved .
In leucorrhoea grind the sap of wood - apple kernel and mesua ferrea in equal quantities and sieve through cloth and take five gram of powder with rice water two or three times in a day .
In jaundice make the person drink fifty grams juice of wood - apple leaves morning and evening mixed with one gram of black pepper .
Massage the leaf juice as oil even in body swelling .
Boil some pulp in hundred grams of water , after getting cold mouth ulcers are cured by washing the mouth .
For blood purification grind and sieve tribulus terrestris with fifty grams of root of wood - apple tree .
Dissolve a teaspoon of powder in boiling water in the morning .
Take hot gulps of by mixing sugar candy or honey .
Put a strip wet in wood - apple juice on forehead in headache .
Drink the juice of eleven leaves after extracting on having persisting headache .
Mix little water in it in summers .
Very old headache will also get cured .
Maize or corn is helpful in getting rid of stomach ulcer .
Because of being a food of high fibers it is extremely useful in reducing weight .
Maize provides better energy in weakness .
On taking in the form of corn flake it is helpful in the stopping of heart disease .
Maize is one of the most popular food items in the world .
Full of protein and vitamins where corn provides energy to the body , there it is also very easily digestible .
After wheat the production of corn is maximum in India .
America is the largest exporter of this .
Heart specialists advice the use of corn oil in food items .
It is also used in making a kind of wine and beer .
Together with being helpful in getting rid of stomach ulcer and gastritis ulcer corn is also helpful in reducing weight .
It provides immense energy in weakness and it is very beneficial in disease of dryness in children .
Corn keeps control of the urinary system , keeps the teeth strong and is also beneficial in heart disease when taken in the form of cornflakes .
Fig is one of the oldest fruit in the world .
The oldest fig tree is in a garden of Sicily .
Fig consists of calcium , fibers and Vitamin A . . and there are approximately 30 calories in one fig .
Because of containing 83 percent sucrose it is the sweetest fruit in the world .
It is believed in domestic treatment that perpetual constipation can be cured by eating fig .
In cold , diseases of lungs boil five figs in water and drink this water morning and evening after sieving .
Eating fig is beneficial in asthma in which cough is discharged , due to this the cough comes out .
Apple is such a fruit which is available in all the places of the world for all the twelve months .
All the diseases stay at bay by eating an apple daily .
In the seventeenth century women used to mix apple pulp in animal fat and put the pack on their face to make their complexion fair .
There are much more nutritive elements in apple .
The apple is full of minerals and vitamins .
Together with this there is large quantity of fibers in it and there is no cholesterol at all .
Apple should be eaten with the peels .
When we take out the peel of apple then the VitaminC just underneath the peel gets destroyed in large quantity .
This fruit consisting of iron , arsenic and phosphorus is also very much beneficial in the weakness of the body .
The right time to drink apple juice is half an hour before meal and before going to sleep .
The complaint of constipation by eating raw apple and dysentery by eating ripe apple can be cured .
Not only does dysentery decrease by giving the pulp of apple in cooked form many times to small children at the time of dysentery but weakness also goes away .
Headache can be cured by eating ripe apple after peeling sprinkled with salt empty stomach in the morning .
Apple is beneficial for those with high blood pressure .
Apple maintains the balance of sodium chloride in kidney .
The peels of apple are also health - enhancer .
Nicely boil the apple peels in water .
Sieve the water afterwards .
By washing eyes with this water the burning in the eyes goes away .
In apple there are special elements to keep the mouth clean too , which are not there in any other fruits .
By eating apple the secretion of the saliva of mouth is good .
Eating apple is good for the health of your teeth .
Our brain of around 1 . to 1 . kilogram weight seems to be made of soft matter of brown color .
Our brain is in fact a complex mass of thousand crore of nerve cells only .
The brain of small honeybee is also made up of these cells only .
One unit of brain , neuron or nerve cell is complete and independent in itself .
Every nerve cell has a long tail .
This tail is as small as 1 mm in some , then in others it is as long as thousand mm or one metre .
The brain is an infinite maze of several thousand crores of cells and the mutual network between them .
On the whole either the pregnancy does not stay in women suffering from tumor or even if it stays then many more complications occur during pregnancy .
Like abortion , premature delivery , premature rupture of the amniotic fluid sac , dislocation of placenta  premature  , weakening of the foetus in the womb , the foetus getting crossed , inverted or skewed .
The child getting stuck at the time of delivery .
The need of caesarean operation for the delivery .
Complications while the operation , need to remove the uterus .
Excessive bleeding post delivery .
Getting anaemic owing to excessive bleeding .
Increase in the size of fibroid .
Many times the cure of uterine glandular swelling is problematic .
The size of uterus also increases in ovarine knot-endometriosis , pregnancy edinomyosis etc . but a skilful gynaecologist can easily find out the disease after a careful examination .
The following tests are important for fibroid .
Sonography through abdomen or vagina  transabdominal and transvaginal  .
Laparoscopy , hysteroscopy . . . .  if needed  .
HIV  if the doctor thinks essential  .
After finding out the condition of fibroid in the uterus with these tests , it can be ascertained by which method it can be removed .
Mere presence of the glandular swelling is not a prerequisite for its removal .
If the symptoms are not appearing then the woman can be counselled and can be asked to come for check up after some time , this treatment in itself is satisfactory .
There is a knot , and therefore it has to be removed , it is not necessary .
If the knot is very big and is getting bigger continuously , if the woman is panicking , the symptoms increase , the symptoms of bleeding , pain and pressure appear , then only it should be removed .
If the sub mucous fibroid is small then it can be removed with the help of uterine hysteroscopic endoscopy .
The fibroid can also be removed with the help of lasers .
There are two types of operations for fibroid .
Myomactomy  removal of knot only  , this operation is done with hysteroscopy or laparoscopy by doing laparotomy  opening stomach  .
Just the tumor is removed in case of young aged females who do not want more children .
Hysterectomy : If the age is not less , the tumor is very big and there is no need of having more children then the entire uterus is removed together with the tumor .
Medication is provided to decrease bleeding and for pain relief and iron is given for treating anemia .
Some special injection and medicine can be given to reduce the size of the fibroid .
GnRH analog  decapeptyl or lupride  , mifepristone , danazol are the main medicines .
But due to these medicines the symptoms of bone weakness and menopause are produced .
The condition becomes as before on stopping the medicine .
The modern treatment laparoscopic myolysis  through laser Nd-YYAG  .
The blocking of uterine artery  ambolization  .
In modern treatment the uterine artery is blocked by putting poly vinyl particles or gel foam powder through a pipe entered through the thigh artery after anaesthesising it .
By blocking the uterine artery the blood supply available to the tumor gets obstructed and the tumor reduces up to 60 % .
A skilful gynaecologist is capable of doing proper treatment after considering everything .
Therefore , it is unnecessary to be scared of leiomyoma disease .
The investigation of the secrets of brain .
If we gradually cut open with a saw and separate the upper part of the skull of a man after making him unconscious on an operation table then by peering inside we can ourselves see the live brain with our own eyes .
Similarly , neuro-surgeons operate the brain by cutting the skull bones with saw and drill .
Bacterial dysentery occurs from a special type of bacteria  bacilli  .
Many things are of just the sort as the inner kernel of the walnut seen after cracking it .
Through the creative capacity or the assistance of the brain itself Einstein . . . Raman , Tagore and Shakespeare could produce their extreme original and unique ideas .
By look so simple but how wonderful is the brain in work capacity .
On investigating any part of brain with microscope we will see that it is mainly made of just one type of cell , neuron or nerve cell .
In bacterial dysentery there is repeated discharge of fecus consisting of blood and phlegm .
Disease of bacterial dysentery is more rampant in places of temperate environment .
The disease of bacterial dysentery occurs more in monsoon season in India .
In the main part of the brain all the life processes keep taking place and a very small center or nucleus controls all of them in the same way as in any other normal cell .
In women , men and all the aged people the disease of bacterial dysentery occurs in similar manner .
By disrupting the phlegmatic action of the large intestine and the phlegmatic action of the end part of the small intestine the bacteria of the disease of bacterial dysentery produce solvency in them .
The matter which fascinated Kahal the most , that was the mutual network process of the nerve cells .
In this immense crowd of cells one cell actually does not touch any other cell .
The axon of one appears to be going very near to the other cell but there always remains a certain distance between the two .
Kahal studied these network places with great minuteness , which later on were given the name of synapse by Sir Charles Sherrington .
How does the information or signal reach from one cell to the other cell .
There are special chemicals or neurotransmitters which do the work of messenger in this synapse . Henry Dale and Otto Loewi made an important discovery by finding acetylcholine .
Consciously a valley has been left between every two nerve cell so that the electric impulse can not cross by jumping over , it has to take the help of a chemical messenger and then alone the signal can get forwarded .
After all why the interference of these chemical substances in the electrical communication system .
What is the benefit of this : The question is in fact very interesting and important .
If we think deeply then this one fact comes up that in this system the information travels in one direction only , not haphazard .
Every synapse gives unidirectional instruction , because the chemical substance can be secreted from the end of the axon only .
In fact in axon the electricity can be conducted equally from both the directions just like wire .
But the direction gets decided at every synapse , because the chemical messenger which can cross the valley is present at the end of axon and not in the body of the next cell .
Thus the signals can never cross the synaptic valley in the opposite direction .
Without this directional instruction the signals running between the millions of cells from both the directions then will create ultimate chaos .
The second benefit is that because of this chemical process there is a delay of approximately the thousandth part of a second or 1 . milli second .
This way the signals can be sequenced with respect to time .
The more the synapses in a neuronal circuit , the slower would be the communication in them .
Synapse has one more use as well .
Because of one chemical substance coming medially we can easily interfere in the communication system of brain .
These chemical substances are called medicines .
Many medicines given by the doctors today - like anaesthesia to make unconscious , tranquilizers for inducing sleep and peace , and many intoxicating substances affect these synapses only .
Why the action site of these medicines are synapse and not the nerve cell itself , to understand it will not be now difficult .
Therefore the effect of these medicines are more in those regions only where there is dense net of synapses .
The person afflicted with the disease of bacterial diarrhoea suddenly becomes victim of intense stomach pain and dysentery .
Every cell in itself appears to be very simple as a unit , but the complex mass of thousands of crores of cells give birth to unlimited possibilities by connecting mutually .
Perhaps this only is the physical basis of our intelligence , consciousness and memory .
From the point of view of creation we can divide the brain into many parts .
Because of being enclosed in a box of bones at one end of the body it is not easy for the brain to keep a direct contact with all the distant parts of the body .
Therefore the role of our spinal cord connected with brain in the form of an extension branch is very important .
Like a thick white rope from the neck to the lower part of the back , spinal cord is safe in the spinal bones .
At regular interval , through the medium of 31 spinal nerves from both its sides spinal cord has contact with the entire body .
Each moment our spinal cord keeps receiving information from skin and other organs , and each moment that keeps sending proper instruction to our muscles .
The spinal cord finishes many normal work on its own on this basis , it does not disturb the brain for everything .
For example , it maintains a proper tension in our muscles so that we can keep standing erect .
We withdraw hand when all of a sudden a pin pierces finger .
This reflex action occurs at the level of spinal cord .
The simplest and basic example of the work method of nervous system is this reflex action only .
Apart from this the main use of spinal cord is like a highway alone .
The entire caravan of all the signals between brain and different parts of the body crosses through this spinal cord alone .
Thus the consequence of minor injury on spinal cord can be serious .
But now let us reach to the brain moving above the spinal cord .
The brain starts just as we enter the head .
Or let us say that the spinal cord gets converted into brain .
On seeing it appears as if the brain is like a very big walnut resting on a strong stem or branch .
Therefore we can divide the brain into 2 parts .
One is this straight stem or brain stem and the second is the main part or cerebrum resting on it .
In fact brain stem seems to be similar to the spinal cord , and it is also situated in its straight line , but it is divided into three parts if we see attentively .
The lowest most part is medulla oblongata , very small and common in appearance but very special in importance .
The various centres which control our internal life processes are present in this alone .
Like , breathing , beating of heart , controlling of blood pressure , digestion of food etc. .
A sudden jerk or injury on the medulla can therefore lead to death in a moment .
But there is nothing to get scared in this .
Nature has placed this very important control-room in a very safe place at the center of the head .
At times in scooter or road accident the neck gets jerked very severely , and medulla stops doing its work on getting damaged .
The ordinary looking injury becomes the reason of immediate death .
The same happens when the criminals are hanged .
Medulla alone is the originating place of 7 out of 12 cranial nerves as well .
The cranial nerves control the muscles of face , tongue , shoulders etc . bring auditory signals from the ears and controls many other internal organs .
If we cross the medulla oblongata from top then pons and mid-brain come .
Mid-brain and pons mainly work as junction .
In a way here many small branches emanate from the main stream of nerves or highway .
Similarly 3 branches go to the cerebellum  mini brain  located at the back of brain-stem .
Like a skilful computer cerebellum does two very important jobs .
First , because of its support only we are able to maintain our balance by standing on just two lags .
We do not fall even when fleeing , running , doing acrobats , bending forward - backward .
Second , this cerebellum only adjusts all our voluntary actions very minutely .
Cerebellum does their fine adjustment with the voluntary actions .
Earlier we mentioned 12 cranial nerves out of which 7 had their origin from medulla .
Similarly 4 more emanate from pons mid-brain .
Their work is to control the muscles responsible for rotating the eyes and to carry sensation from the face .
Now after crossing the brain stem we reach the most huge and main part of the brain - cerebrum or fore-brain .
On crossing this line one gets to feel a very important difference .
From the unconscious state we have come to the conscious state .
From darkness to light .
We have no intuition of whatever is happening in the brain-stem or cerebellum .
As if we are sleeping in a very deep sleep .
But just on reaching the level of cerebrum we become awake .
We start feeling comfort , sadness .
We feel that we are doing all the works willingly and not like a machine .
We start saying I am there . am doing . am liking it .
Does any machine feel like this .
None of the organisms have as developed cerebrum as is ours .
Let us forget for a moment the difference of small and big and place the brains of mouse and brain close by and see .
The brain stem and other parts appears to be similar in both .
And why should not it be  After all both have to control respiration , heart , food , blood pressure etc. .
While jumping and running the rat also has to maintain the balance of its body .
But when we look at the cerebrum we can feel that there is a huge difference between mouse and man .
Our cerebrum has become so huge that it has almost covered all other parts of the brain .
Because of this surprising growth of cerebrum the brain of man seems to be the biggest in proportion to body .
Although the brain of whale and elephant are certainly bigger than ours .
The weight of brain of our closest relative , monkeys , is just half a kilogram .
The weight of the brain of whale is 8000th part of the total weight of its body while the weight of our brain is around 50th part of the weight of our body .
If the bodies of whale and man are made equal then the human brain would look bigger even more than 150 times of the brain of whale .
There is one such speciality in cerebrum which has been a riddle for us even now .
This is divided into two parts , which we call the right and the left cerebral hemispheres .
There is a very small bridge connecting the two - corpus callosum .
Strange thing is this , that the right hemisphere is connected to the left half of the body and controls that alone while the left hemisphere is connected to the right half of the body .
All the nerves traveling to and fro have to cross the middle line to go to the other side .
This very system is found in all the organisms .
The effect of an injury in the right half of the head is seen in the left half of the body .
Similarly , on pricking a needle in the left hand its pain can be felt by the right cerebral hemisphere .
Like a modern office in the cerebrum also the division of labor has been done in a very good manner .
The upper thick surface of 3 mm is called cortex and the maximum nerve cells accumulate in this only .
In the rest inner part the net of wire like nerves are spread .
The small masses of some cells only may be seen somewhere in middle .
The most posterior part of this cortex does the work of vision , while a very small part at the center does hearing .
The system of olfaction is at the lower surface .
Though this part in man has become very unimportant in comparison to animals like dogs .
But we should not forget that neither light nor sound or smell can reach in the brain .
Only the electric impulses are reaching there through the nerves .
So who is seeing , hearing everything while sitting in our cerebrum .
Is one more small man is sitting inside the human brain .
This is a complex riddle by which since time immemorial both scientists and philosophers are being perplexed .
Approximately 1 cm wide and 6 cm long strip on the surface of the central part of the cerebrum is called ` motor cortex ' and all the muscles of the other half of the body is being controlled from here alone .
The representation of body here also is inverted only : head down and legs up .
What is the secret behind this chaotic system , even no one knows this nicely .
It can happen that one day you may solve this mystery .
A similar strip near the motor cortex is called ` sensory cortex ' where all the sensations from the other half of the body come .
Touch , heat , pressure , pricking everything is felt here only .
But how this : We feel pain in finger when thorn pricks , but not in head .
But if thought attentively the sensation on being produced in the finger nerve reaches sensory cortex after crossing spinal cord and brain stem at great speed .
Then only we realize pain .
The pain is in finger , this is only a natural illusion so that we immediately protect our own finger .
Roughly we can conclude this , that our nervous system works in the same way as any telephone system .
If the wire gets severed in the middle then the entire communication of that area gets disrupted .
Similarly , the moment a nerve between the brain and any organ gets severed the transfer of signals stops that very moment .
We can not move our hands and feet even if we feel like .
This is called paralysis .
Nothing has happened to the muscles , not even to the motor cortex .
Only the one which establishes the communication between the two has been cut .
Similarly , now even if we prick needle in the finger or burn it we will not feel any pain .
Similarly , we can easily estimate as to what could be the consequence if any part of the nervous system gets injured or any disease occurs .
In today 's mechanical era this is only natural that we compare the various organs of our body with the instruments used in day today life .
We say that heart is like a pump , eyes like a camera , nerves are like electric wires . and brain .
Quickly the answer would be that the brain is a computer .
Today at every place , whether classroom or shop , office or home , the assistance of machines are being taken to do simple calculations .
We have loaded the burden of our brain on these calculators and computers .
Our brain as well as computers also can do the actions like multiplication , division , addition and subtraction .
But are the methods of both same .
In future could such advanced super computers be made which would have intelligence and consciousness like us .
Does the brain and computer have the only difference of small and big , or do they have some principle differences between them which is not possible to obliterate .
Such interesting questions today are of pervasive importance .
In the efforts to solve the questions , on one the hand the development of computers is getting a lot of help as well .
Right there on the other hand we have also started to understand the secrets of brain in a better way .
Due to contact with machines we have also understood this that for understanding the complexities of any big instrument in a better way we should first make its small and simple model .
In schools and colleges also children must be encouraged to make models of aeroplanes , steam engines , radio etc . so that while playing they should get familiar with the basic construction of these .
Why not we study a small model of brain before understanding an incredible computer like the human brain .
We should make a child and computer sit together and ask both of them to do the same work , multiply 9 by 9 , and whatever the answer comes go on multiplying that with 9 again .
The computer will start working according to the instruction and it will continue working till the time we do not switch that off .
But the child will throw away his paper and pencil in a few minutes and will in fact start questioning you , oh , why are you making me do this useless work .
What does this mean . am tired , leave . will not do anymore .
If we still insist him then he will start doing mistakes , while he also very well knows the methods to multiply same as that of computer .
The child soon gets bored with useless work .
There is unlimited variation in his thinking , not definiteness like computer .
He will suddenly find out a new solution to any question which no one had told him before .
Will any computer start thinking about gravitation like Newton when an apple falls on it .
Or on providing with all the information about strange animals will it find out the theory of evolution like Darwin .
One more interesting thing is that the ability to commit mistakes is also in brain alone , not in computer .
Many times we commit such mistakes while speaking .
The professor of Oxford William Spooner is very famous for this .
Thus it is also called spoonerism .
At present some scientists are engrossed seriously in studying about this as well as to how these mistakes occur in brain .
If we see with an all pervasive point of view then many times in laboratory some of our mistakes only have given birth to new inventions .
It is clear that there are some special qualities in man like intelligence , consciousness , prudence etc to which the best of today 's computers have not been able to reach .
In future it will ever be able to reach , there is doubt in it .
But there are also such things in which the computer seems to be more dexterous than our brain , and here lies its actual usefulness .
The computer can do any calculation very fast , while we will take years to do the same work when sitting with paper and pencil .
The computer which plays chess made by Dr Hans Berliner selects the most suitable move from 175000 moves on analyzing them in just 1 second .
Till that time we will not even be able to count up to five .
That is why in controlling fast moving spaceships , rockets and aeroplanes we have to depend on computer .
Similarly many important calculations today are so long and boring that it would be problematic for us to finish them .
Now after entrusting this job to any computer the scientist can pay attention to more comfortable and satisfactory aspects .
In one more context also if we want to transfer in computer then this can be done in few hours only .
The way in which today another cassette can easily be prepared from the recorded music of one cassette .
But if we want to transfer the entire knowledge accumulated in one human brain to another human brain then how much time will be taken .
Is it therefore that we have to spend 20-25 years on education in schools and colleges .
No matter how advanced or clever the computer is , it does only that work whose process we are aware of and which we have made the computer learn .
Whether 2 has to be added to 2 or to solve the complicated integration of the modern physical science , our brains alone will teach the computers the methods to solve them .
Our brain has programmed the computer , but who programs our brain .
Opposite to the normal congenital reflex actions this newly learned anti-reflex actions may only be established at the level of the most developed part of the brain , that is , cerebrum .
Therefore these have the maximum importance in man .
By making the reflex actions present by birth as base we go on adding new links on them one after the other .
Pavlov started thinking if this is also one of the types of what we call education .
Perhaps this only is the base of our exquisite ability to communicate mutually through a systematic language .
First we point to a child a moving elephant on a road and say that see that is elephant .
Then just by seeing the picture of elephant the child soon starts recognizing it .
Finally , only on seeing the word elephant written on paper the image of elephant forms in his brain .
Is it not a matter of surprise because there is absolutely no kind of similarity between the word elephant and that huge , black quadruple having long trunks .
It seems as if language is the highest achievement of the human brain .
Can the present human society be imagined without language .
Is science , history or business possible if we are not able to tell each other our thoughts through language , or not make them permanent by writing .
Scientists at present are trying to make our closest relatives chimpanzees learn the language , but it is clear that compared to us this ability is negligible in them .
In the past few years Roger Sperry has amazed everyone by doing some very important experiments directly on human brain .
While receiving the Nobel Prize in Stockholm on December 8 , 1981 he told in his speech that the beginning of all the studies started with those patients who used to get very intense epileptic strokes and no medicine was benefitting them .
When there was no way out it was finally decided as to why should not the corpus callosum-the bridge connecting both the cerebral hemispheres be cut in the middle , so that at least the unwanted excitement occurring on one side should not spread to the other side .
The daring with which this operation was done much more surprising than that were the results .
Though we certainly get description of two-headed animals and demons in ancient stories but no one knows as to how will a person with two brains or split brain think actually .
In the words of Roger Sperry if a person with split brain attended a party six months after the surgery then no one was able to see any abnormality in him .
Both the hemispheres of cerebrum continued fulfilling their responsibility by controlling the respective halves of the body .
But after an in-depth study this surprising conclusion was clear that there is a huge difference in the capabilities of both the hemispheres .
Everyone at least know this that the ability of both of our hands are not equal .
In maximum people the straight or right hand is much stronger and dexterous .
The same thing has also been seen in all the animals .
It can easily be estimated by this that our left hemisphere is more effective , and like a class monitor it has command over the other hemisphere .
But when Roger Sperry severed the contact between the two hemispheres then how special is the place of each in our mental activities was estimated for the first time .
If we consider the subjects being taught in the school then the division between hemispheres would be like this .
Left hemisphere - language  speaking , cognizing the meaning of the words written and heard  , maths , analysis of problems , estimation of time .
Right hemisphere - geometry , painting , instrumental music , organization of facts , estimation of space .
Whatever we study in class generally gets accumulated in the right or left hemisphere according to this area division .
But because of being connected with corpus callosum the knowledge of one is always available for the other when needed .
On the contrary the matter of the patients of Roger Sperry is in fact indeed exquisite .
Whatever one cerebral hemisphere learns the other does not get to know anything about that .
As a simple example if a pin used to be pierced on the little finger of the right hand and afterwards he was asked to now demonstrate with the left hand that in which finger did he feel the pain then he used to be left dumbfounded .
The contact of left hand is with the right hemisphere and it has no knowledge of the piercing of the pin .
With how much vigor and hard work scientists are engrossed in studying our brain and how thrilling are their experiments .
One attraction of science is even this that all of us can participate in its birth .
In any huge class some students would be uncommon .
That is , instead of playing , writing , eating with the right hand like all of us they would be using the left hand .
These left handed players however have a distinct grandeur in cricket .
What is their ratio in your school or classroom .
In what subjects do they get more marks : Or in what do they take more interest : How is their speaking ability .
If we consider the whole school then is there any difference between girls and boys , small kids and adults in this respect .
But firstly in order to measure everything we have to decide some or the other physical scale .
To reach at any authentic scientific conclusion is difficult without this .
Breast cancer is a scary name for women .
Thousands of deaths can occur if breast cancer is not detected in its initial days .
Maximum succumb financially to breast cancer .
The patient gets tortured by the fear of physical deformity and the chances of the disease to appear again even when the life is saved on late detection at the increase in the seriousness of the surgery .
If cancer is detected in the initial condition only then treatment is possible without any physical deformity , even the patient also can be made disease free cent percent .
This way lacs of women and families can be saved from mental and physical torture .
In contemporary phase rapidity has come in the spread of breast cancer due to changes in the social and lifestyle habits .
Many methods of cancer detection like mammography , MRI , CT scan are useful though till now but some or the other way the ill effects of radiations becomes visible .
In such situation the doctors have got hold of a new weapon - infrared thermography .
In infrared thermography breast cancer can be tested as soon as possible without lethal rays .
Greek and Egyptian medicos knew the relationship of this disease and the temperature of the body .
Sir William Herschel had discovered infrared and heat dissemination in 1800 .
But till 1970 it was not certain whether infrared can be used the field of medicine .
On passing the rays through the prism , the area which is below the red color of the light spectrum gets the maximum heat where we do not see any light .
In this method infrared detector on receiving infrared wave energy converts it in electric signals proportionately .
This ratio is in proportion to the temperature of the targeted organ .
Electromagnetic wave energy is converted to electronic video signal through one of its instruments .
Different pictures are obtained in different diseases and healthy condition , which on recognition the disease is diagnosed .
Breast thermography helps in the detection of cancer in the very initial days and helps in quick treatment .
Of course confirmation from other laboratory methods is certainly important .
Because of less information in it , it is easy to read thermography in comparison to mammography .
Lacs of women can be benefitted with breast thermography .
The use of infrared thermography can be done in the detection of the narrowness of the blood vessels in diabetes etc. .
Several times the disease occurring due to physical relations takes a very dangerous form and gives birth to many other lethal diseases .
Any disease which spreads due to physical relations is called STD , that is , sexually transmitted disease .
Neck cancer and many other cancers can occur from STD .
Some infections together with the complications related to womb , disease of liver may even lead to HIV AIDS .
There are approximately 20 types of sexually transmitted infections .
STD spreads through bacteria , parasites and virus .
Out of them some of the STD which spread rapidly are as following .
HPV , that is , human pappiloma virus is a viral disease .
HPV disease engulfs around 80 % of the total people who make physical relations .
The infection of HPV is of more than 100 types and 3 types of infections out of these spread through sex .
HPV infection engulfs men more rapidly in comparison to women .
On being infected cauliflower like warts appear near genitals and neck of the uterus , hips or neck .
For protection from HPV infection do not make relations with an infected partner if possible .
Even if you make relations then also use latex condoms .
Complete riddance from HPV infection can not however be obtained .
But by burning the warts too with the help of medicines one can get relief .
Genital herpes is also a viral infection which occurs in those who make relations with infected partners .
Genital herpes is of two types .
After the genital herpes infection , inflammation or wounds erupt near vagina or phallus , which causes pain .
Genital herpes infection spreads not only on making relations but also by touching .
Apart from this , in women , this infection also gives birth to diseases like vaginal discharge .
In order to get protection against genital herpes infection do not make relations with multiple partners .
Even by using condoms while making relations it can not be stopped therefore do not even make relation during infection .
If pregnant woman is afflicted with this then while delivery she may pass this infection on to her baby .
Syphilis is a bacterial infection .
Syphilis affects lips , mouth , kidneys and genitals .
Apart from an infected partner syphilis can also pass from a pregnant mother to her child .
In the initial symptoms there are small inflammations which do not pain .
At times swelling also occurs near lymph nodes in which there is no itching at all .
Many times people ignore it .
These inflammations are not permanent , that is , they keep coming and going .
Therefore many times they are not even diagnosed for years .
Apart from diseases like AIDS , syphilis infection may also lead to diseases like blindness , mental imbalance and heart attack .
Many times even deaths occur because of syphilis infection .
If you are infected and pregnant , then you can even lose the child .
For safety together with condoms pay full attention to hygiene also .
Get the infection checked at regular intervals .
If the infection has spread then immediately get the treatment done .
With the help of injection one can control it within 24 hours .
Tykomonosis infection spreads through a parasite .
The main symptom for this is the green and yellow vaginal discharge in women .
Apart from this , itching near or inside vagina with discomfort at the time of micturition is also a common symptom .
There are no symptoms for this infection in most of the men .
But many times burning sensation inside the phallus is the symptom for tykonomosis .
Pay full attention to hygiene and get check up done regularly .
According to Dr Preeti maximum STD are bacterial .
For safety against STD , If together with correct information attention is paid to some common things then the chances of these can be decreased .
Health and regular check up .
Generally most of the women do not get regular checkups , because of which they have to face dangerous diseases afterwards .
Generally , in girls , pap starts occurring after the age of 15 years .
The white discharge happening to girls generally after menstruation or at times even before is only called pap .
It is not important to get pap test done before making physical relation but the test must be done after the gap of 12 years .
The pap test generally must be done regularly after the age of 40 years .
But still , on getting greatly involved in sex the pap test must be done from the age of 30 years .
Pap test is of two types .
Leukoria test is done to find about common infections .
Leukoria test completely depends on physical relations .
Those women who are unmarried or then those who do not get involved in sex , they do not need the leukoria test a great deal .
Pap infection test is also of two types .
One , which is a simple test , with its positive medicine only the complication can be controlled .
Second . hyper plasia ' is the second important test for pap infection .
With ` hyper plasia ' pap infection test it can be found out if there is any cyst in the ovary or not .
The doctors generally advise for ` hyper plasia ' test to women of 40 years .
The homeopathic doctor Minu Mehta says that women should get hyper plasia test done right after the age of 30 years .
Though if pap test is done continuously every year right after establishing sex relationship then protection can be obtained from dangerous diseases like cervical cancer .
Liquid pap test is done for this .
Breast cancer is engulfing Indian women very fast .
According to a recent survey maximum women become the victims of cancer because they do not take their health seriously right from the beginning and considering slight tumors etc as normal , ignore it .
According to Dr Pankaj Kumar of Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Hospital , women should include mammography as well in their regular health check up .
Women of 20-29 years should get mammography done once every third year .
Not just this , together with this one should also do BSF or breast self exam .
Breast Self Exam should be started right after the age of 20 years .
Normally , doing BSF may keep you vigilant for breast cancer , but you must certainly get mammography done on having any node , unwanted pain or any type of secretion .
The hormonal changes start happening after the age of 30 years because of which the size of the ovary starts increasing or else there is a persisting fear of the formation of cyst in it .
Thus , getting ultrasound done every year is very important .
The treatment of any disease occurring due to cyst or hormonal changes can be started immediately by this , on being diagnosed at the right time .
After an ultrasound if cyst is found in the ovary then immediately get its biopsy test done .
With the help of injection some sample of the liquid material of cyst are taken in this test .
After its the test it becomes clear whether that tumor is cancerous or not .
Though biopsy test is a part of your regular checkups , but still on getting cyst or node because of hormonal changes , pain in the lower abdomen , sudden growth of hair on face , increase in weight and irregularity in menstruation you must get this done .
Often after crossing 40 women stop paying attention towards their health .
They feel that now they do not need any regular checkups , but this is not proper .
There are many such diseases after 40 which may take awful shape on not taking precaution .
The FSH test must be done at that time when menopause is about to start or has already started .
In FSH test one can be saved from the diseases happening at the time of or after menopause .
Pelvic exam test must be done annually .
With the help of pelvic exam test any changes occurring in uterus , reproductive organs , bladder etc can become known .
If any kind of unusual change is happening in these then it can be known through pelvic exam test .
One 's cholesterol must be checked regularly after attaining 45 years .
If you are less than 45 years and you smoke then you take the advice of your doctor regarding this as to when you should get your cholesterol test done .
Not just this , if you have obesity or the disease of fatness then you should get the cholesterol test done after 40 .
Maximum women in India give birth to children till the age of 30-35 years .
After delivery white discharge takes place from the body of women in very large quantity .
Because of this a lot of calcium comes out of their body and by becoming weak the bones break on slight injury occurs .
Although 60 years is the age for the test of osteoporosis , but keeping the health in mind get it done every year after second or third delivery .
Bone densitometry is also done for calcium .
By the bone densitometry test the quantity of calcium is found out .
After the age of 45 years the danger of colon cancer increases in women .
Although the cases of colon cancer are seen less in India , but still regular checkups is important .
Every year FOBT test should be done for colon cancer .
Sample of human fecus is taken in FOBT test .
After the FOBT test it becomes clear if any type of blood etc . is coming in your stomach or not .
Flexible sigmoendoscopy must be done once every five years .
By flexible sigmoendoscopy it becomes known whether there is any type of swelling or not in your liver , stomach or reproductive organs .
Colonoscopy must be done once every 10 years .
That is , one at 40 then second at 50 years of age .
There are some more tests apart from this whose regular checkups is not essential but still get them done at some interval .
These tests are - blood pressure , diabetes , depression and obesity  fatness  .
Poiseuille in last century came to know of an important fact about the flow of any fluid in tubes .
If the radius of the tube is increased twice then the flow of water in it increases 8 times .
Because of this reason by only making the radius of vessels in our body more and less our blood pressure and the supply of blood in any of the organs is skilfully controlled .
If you are playing hockey or participating in any race then your normal blood pressure of 120 increases very much so that the supply of blood becomes fast .
It also becomes clear from this that because of the muscles present in their walls our vessels can constrict and dilate as per need .
If in place of our vessels there were pipes of steel then would they give service for eighty and hundred years without getting rusted , without getting broken .
Many times with increasing age and many different reasons like smoking cigarette , chewing tobacco , obesity , eating excessive salt , mental disturbance , deficiency of physical labor , the elasticity of the vessels decrease , it starts contracting .
This only will be called high blood pressure or hypertension which has become a common disease today .
Nature has created our vessels only for bearing a certain pressure .
If the pressure on them is constantly very high then it would have a bad effect on their walls .
As a result of the blood pressure our main organs would get damaged at the end : brain , heart and kidneys .
But it is not essential that medicine must be taken if the blood pressure is measured slightly high .
Otherwise , first we should see if there is any reason in our life style which can have ill effect on the blood pressure .
If you take two simple roller pumps in place of the two halves of the heart auricle and ventricle then you can do the entire task of the heart .
Impure blood comes in the right auricle through the two main arteries which is sent to the lung for purification by the right ventricle through an aorta and one aorta from the posterior part of the body .
Both the main arteries open in the right auricle .
If we want that blood does not go in the right auricle and ventricle then we will have to do one thing .
One tube each will have to be put in the dorsal and ventral main arteries .
In short , the blood will come out through them and the right half of the heart will be completely empty .
Medical surgery does this only .
If we connect these tubes which come out of the main arteries to the tube of the roller pump and switch on the motor then the blood will start flowing ahead .
Blood is sent to the artificial lungs for purification .
Artificial lungs are also a very simple apparatus .
A glass vessel full of blood in which oxygen is released in the form of bubbles .
There is a special arrangement so that lather do not form by the bubbles of oxygen .
Without the help of roller pumps and artificial lungs also the flow of blood can be kept going .
Heart - lung-machine is made up of such roller pumps and artificial lungs only , by which the most complicated of surgeries are also possible .
The heart pumps nutrients and oxygen to the entire body .
The heart too needs fuel for its work .
The heart can not take nutrients from the blood filled in its chambers .
Close to the origin of the aorta two coronary arteries originate which get divided on the surface of the heart like minute branches .
Coronary arteries distribute oxygen and nutrients to the heart .
The meaning of coronary is coronation and these arteries are spread like a crown on the heart .
The amount of work which the coronary arteries do for the heart and body then it is correct for it to be decorated with a crown .
On the obstruction of these coronary arteries one gets heart attack .
The collision of ultrasonic energy with various organs , getting reflected and taking a photograph of this is only called ultrasonography .
These days there is discussion about ultrasonography .
But the knowledge about the technique of USG started right from the beginning of this century .
It was seen at that time that on putting minute pressure on some special substances one type of energy is released .
Which is calles piso electric effect and this effect became the base of USG .
In this process transducer is that part which emits ultrasonic energy for a moment and then catches the reflected rays back .
Instrument like computer makes its picture with the help these waves which is imprinted on the photographic plate .
With its help proper treatment is done by doing medical cure .
The popular belief which is more in the minds of people is that the use of USG is done mainly for the problems of infant baby and its mother .
But it is not like that .
Stomach is like a closed pouch , inside which gall bladder , liver , intestines , kidneys , lymph glands , spleen etc are situated .
Similarly in the cage center of the chest ribs heart and lungs are situated .
For the cure of the diseases occurring in these organs situated in these closed boxes normal or special USG is important .
Normal or special USG save the patients many times from the difficulties of surgery .
Liver is a very important organ of the body .
The more this organ is important the more are the diseases found in them .
The infections of liver , cyst , normal tumors or else the lethal tumors of cancer , the clear cure of all can be done through ultrasound .
Similarly , if the blood has clotted in the spleen or there is lymphoma cancer , then its diagnosis is also done through ultrasound .
The kidneys are as important for the normal functions of the body as the heart .
Because of the life-long working of kidneys only it is possible to remain alive .
Whether there is kidney or not , if there then whether it is working properly or not or if there is any type of cyst , stone , swelling , pus , this also is told to us by the ultrasound test .
Till some time ago in order to find this , X-ray was taken by injecting dye in blood , which used to take a lot of time and it was also painful .
The problem of thyroid gland is also very common .
For the study and diagnosis of thyroid gland also there is a less need of using radioactive elements due to ultrasound with which both the treater and the treated have less dangers of radioactivity .
The diagnosis of all the diseases like parathyroid , prostate , adrenal etc is possible through USG .
One very important use of ultrasound is for the diseases of womb especially for cancer .
It is believed that U . . . mammography is not inferior in any way to the popular X-ray mammography .
It gives cure in 75-90 % cases .
USG mammography is comparatively simple and it saves the patient from radioactivity .
The extent to which ultrasonography is useful in the test of foetus in the womb is not anywhere .
Whether the foetus in the womb is twin or not , whether the organs of the child are forming properly and the whether the foetus is developing , all these are found from the USG test of the uterus .
Many serious complications are found in the foetus like the non-formation of the head or even the water getting filled in it  hydrocephalous  etc. .
Ultrasonography gives clue to all these problems .
Apart from the correct information about the foetus , one more important information which found through USG is in the matter of placenta .
The properly formed foetus may also get destroyed by some or the other shortcoming or defect of the placenta .
By ultrasound all the deformities can be detected , the status of the placenta , any bleeding from it or if there is any calcification etc. .
By which the doctors can act in time and save the foetus .
By USG that is , ultrasonography a lot of help can be obtained can be obtained in the detection and diagnosis of the disease in the field of medicine .
Very important help is received in the testing of foetuses and organs .
So important , simple and omniavailable technique today is being wrongly used for a hideous work .
Every one must have heard and many women must also have got advice that they should get ultrasonography sex determination test of their foetus .
In some form or the other we participate in the pre-delivery sex determination test and female foeticide and the destruction of half the population due to materialistic reasons .
Because of cataract crores of people world over are deprived of eyesight .
Cataract disease is connected to age and often this makes the people who are more than 50 years of age as its victims .
On getting hurt in the eyes or due to any other disease cataract can occur or else this may be a congenital disease or a disease occurring after a year of birth .
The rate of blindness due to cataract is more in our country in comparison with the western countries .
According to the Blind Control in India there are 1,20,00,000 blind people in the country out of which 80 % people are victims of cataract .
Though this blindness can be rectified through surgery .
The natural lens inside the eye starts getting opaque in cataract by which the eyesight gradually decreases .
This is called white cataract .
In the initial condition though there is improvement in sight by the use of spectacles but with increase in cataract one feels the need to change the spectacles .
After a condition there is no improvement even on changing the spectacles .
At present the only permanent solution for this is surgery .
To make the surgery of cataract even more comfortable a very new technique has been developed which is called ` phaco emulsification ' technique .
To take out the cataract with the help of the technique of ` phaco emulsification ' a small incision of 3 mm is made .
Through which energy is given by the phaco machine and it dissolves the cataract inside and sucks it out of the eye .
Now through this small incision a foldable lens is fixed in the eye which opens on its own after entering in the eye .
Since this incision is very small , therefore there is no need to put suture to this .
Thus , it is called the suture less surgery .
The special benefit of this surgery is that the person can see clearly from the very next day and he can go to his work after a day .
He is finally given the number of spectacles after a week while in the suture surgery he is given the number after two months .
The surgery with phaco machine is done with utmost care .
To do this the doctor is needed to establish harmony between both his eyes , both hands and both legs .
One leg operates the phaco machine and the other focuses the surgical microscope for eyes .
One hand handles the needle of phaco machine , the other hand fills cataract in this needle by the instrument .
Expensive machines are used in the technique of phaco emulsification .
Therefore . phaco emulsification ' technique is costlier than normal surgeries .
Phaco machine is proving to be a boon for the patients of cataract .
The surgery done by phaco machine is easy , painless and can be done in less time .
You can imagine that it is possible to take out any object from inside the body without putting an incision on that part .
Especially , such objects which are very hard and is hidden deep inside the body like stones of urinary tract and calculus .
More than 50 lac people are infested with stones of the urinary tract and everyday there is constant increase in their number .
Till date surgery was the only treatment to take out the stone but several complications used to crop up in that .
But now a technique which is called lithoptysis has become available to take the stone out without surgery .
The technique of lithoptysis was used in 1980 for the first time and from 1987 it has become available in India as well .
In the lithoptysis technique the stones present in any part of the urinary tract are targeted with aim and then the stones are broken by the shower of high capacity waves .
The pieces of stones then come out alone with the urine .
Today it has gained credibility as the most safe , simple and theoretical procedure .
If the diagnosis of the disease of the patient has been done then there is a need of some common blood and urine tests , X-rays of the kidneys and IBP X-ray .
Generally there is no need to make the patient unconscious in this process .
The action is completed without pain by just numbing the treated organ and by a sleep inducing injection .
The time required in the lithoptysis technique depends on the size of the stone and its number .
Generally this is done in one episode .
One episode in this is of 30-40 minutes and a gap of 4 days is maintained so that unnecessary rays do not fall on the body .
When these rays collide with the body then often no sensation is produced .
Some patients may be feeling slight piercing , but there is no pain .
Most of the patients can return home immediately after the treatment .
As an exception , one may have to be put under vigilance for 24 hours .
Post treatment the patient has to come back again for treatment after 3 months .
Then by taking a new X-ray it is seen if any part of stone has been left back or not .
Since the practice of lithoptysis technique has only been 8-10 years , information about its long term effects have not been gathered .
Of course , in complications immediately after treatment bleeding in urine and feeling of intense pain in 1-2 micturition are included .
Approximately 90 % of the patients get complete relief by the technique of lithoptysis .
In some the action may have to be repeated twice or more .
The expense at every sitting amounts to nearly 8 thousand rupees which includes the stay at hospital as well as the fee of the doctor .
Presently , this facility is available in 30-35 cities in our country .
In lithotripsy there is no need of surgery or incision .
You can start the normal daily life in a week .
The action can be repeated if the stone forms again .
The technique of lithoptysis can easily be adopted for those patients who have been declared unfit for surgery like aged , patients of diabetes , blood pressure or heart disease .
The problem of uncontrolled micturition .
in women the urinary opening is between genitals and anal opening .
The tract at the center of the urinary opening from the urinary bladder is straight and small .
Babies and kids do not have control in the state of urination and the urine comes out on its own when the urinary bladder gets filled with urine .
Maximum children acquire control on urination by five years of age and urinate at the right place only .
They stop wetting clothes and bed .
Not having control on urination and the clothes getting spoilt are common problems in women .
It has been known through researches that the problem of clothes getting spoilt due to not having control on urination is found to be 5 to 7 % in the age group of 15-44 years . to 15 % in age group of 45-64 years of age and 16 to 20 % in women of 65 years and more .
The complication of not having control on urination may become severe in different women .
Permanent treatment is possible in women or else control is obtained through treatment .
The complication of not having control on urination , the problem of leaking on its own may occur due to the reason of diseases of urinary system or the various diseases of organs situated close to it .
Urine may come out on its own when pressure is exerted on urinary bladder , urinary system , when there is tension due to coughing , sneezing or wearing excessive tight clothes .
The most common problem of women is the problem of urine leakage .
If the muscles of urinary bladder are hyper active then the muscles may get contracted on filling of slight volume of urine in urinary bladder and the clothes may get spoiled .
This problem may occur because of the destruction of the nerves of urinary bladder .
But in several women its cause is not diagnosed .
This problem may occur in some due to mental tension .
Women often try to control urine for long time .
The urine comes out on its own from the urinary bladder on being accumulated more than its capacity or it getting filled with urine when the capacity is less .
Clothes may also be spoiled by not having control due to some structural defects in urinary bladder  urinary tract .
If from the urinary tract the passage of urine is created through the rectum  fistula  or genitals then also the problem may arise .
There is an imminent danger of the formation of fistula because of complex , long stuck delivery .
Though maximum women try to keep the problem as secret , but the treatment of this problem is possible .
The doctors try to find out the root cause through investigation and essential tests .
To find out the reasons , the help of tests like the test of urine , bed rest , measurement of the volume of urine left in the urinary bladder , the speed of the flow of urine , the pressure of the leakage of urine , ultrasound , x-ray , CT scan etc is taken .
The solution of the problem is dependent on the root cause .
If the women are infested with the infection of urinary system then by consuming proper antibiotic medicine the women can get rid of the problem very fast .
If there is any abnormality of fistula or structure then the rectification of these deformities is possible through surgery .
If there is obstruction in the urinary passage then there can be the need to broaden or opening it .
If the problem is to not being able to have control on urination for long duration then by the treatment of problem the quality of life can be improved .
If the cause is not diagnosed then the treatment is possible through behavioural techniques , medicine and surgery .
If not able to have control on urination then the consumption of water , liquid and drinking substances should be done in limited quantity .
Do not consume tea , coffee , carbonated drinking substances or it should be done in as much less quantity as possible along with it .
Reduce the weight if the weight is excessive .
If infested with any type of allergy , cough , constipation then get the treatment done .
Do exercise of pelvis and stomach .
Mental tension is an important reason for not having control over urination .
Tension , worry are lethal for the physical and mental health .
Stay away from these as much as possible , live life happily , free of tension and worry .
In these women urine gets leaked on because of the reason of exerting pressure , coughing , sneezing .
If relief is not got from the above mentioned efforts then they should do exercise of hips and muscles of the lower part of the pelvis .
Various methods of treatment have been developed in these patients .
If these increases the will power in patients then also relief may be got from the problems .
These patients get relief in 80 % by using the instrument placed close to the genitals by which the lower part of the urinary bladder gets support .
Similarly , plugs are also available in the foreign countries to block the passage of urinary opening or else injections of dense sticky substance is also put in order to block the passage in the urinary tube .
If relief is not obtained from the above mentioned efforts then women can become problem free through surgery .
Because of not having control over urination in the state of hyperactivity of urinary bladder , women stay in haste , their urine can leak .
This is the second most important reason of not being able to have control on urination .
If this complication is because of the diseases of nerve cells then a proper treatment of disease is essential .
If the cause is not known in these patients then they must be given training to have control on urination .
Stop urine for a definite time and the duration must be tried to increase up to 3-4 hours gradually , do some exercise of hips and pelvis along with it .
Control on urine is done through the medium of brain , spinal cord and nerves .
If the will power is made strong , the idea is repeatedly revised in the mind that I am capable of having control on my urinary system then control can be obtained .
Around 85 % also get relief by exciting the muscles of pelvis by electric waves .
Many medicines are available as solution to these types of problems .
They are advised to take anti-cholinergic or anti-depressant medicines .
Problem in the outflow of urine on excessive filling of urine in urinary bladder , obstruction in passage , damage of the nervous system , consumption of antipsoric medicine or mental tension , may be the reasons of habit .
By finding the root cause treatment should be done .
If the problem is serious then women can urinate at regular intervals by putting a tube in the urinary tract or the urinary tract of these can be broadened or the treatment is possible through surgery .
Unable to keep control on urination , self leaking , feeling hasty , is a common problem in women and their quality of life is affected because of this .
The complication of leaking of urine on exerting pressure may occur in 20 to 40 % adult females .
But the problem is not untreatable , women can become problem free by changing the life style , habits , doing exercise of hips and pelvis , medicine , treatment by surgery and other techniques .
Therefore these should not hesitate , should not feel embarrassed , should lead a healthy , normal life after getting treated by taking advice from a skilled doctor .
This discomfort can arise generally by peeing in the public place , drinking less water and not cleaning the genitals properly .
The complaint of urine infection can occur both in men and women but this complaint is found more in women because the inner part of their genitals stays open .
Slight dirt , showing carelessness in hygiene , wearing dirty panty repeatedly or wearing wet panty give birth to urine infection and may give discomfort of many days to the person .
Therefore , every person should stay beware of it .
The women should especially pay more attention to the hygiene of their body .
Those women should stay even more careful who have already faced this problem once .
When the menstruation stops after the age of 50-52 .
After the age of 50-52 the smoothness of the vaginal tract diminishes and the walls start becoming thin because of this , then the chance of infection increases very much .
The distorted form of urine infection is swelling in the vaginal tract and micturion with discomfort .
In urine infection urine comes with obstruction and burning sensation .
The stream of urine being distorted and not straight , intense burning sensation around the place of urine , onset of fever .
In the condition of less urination the doctor puts a urinary bladder and tube .
The reason for intense inflammation around the place of micturition is indeed the growth of E . Coli bacteria .
The occurrence of urinary infection in females may be a common thing but it is quite shameful and uncomfortable .
Not peeing at public places and drinking lots of water and cleaning the vaginal tract , wearing clean panty is important so that one can continue to stay safe from this uncomfortable disease as much as possible .
After intercourse with husband the vaginal tract must be cleaned with water till inside so that inner cleanliness is maintained .
Light , easily digestible food , carrot , papaya , cucumber , gourd , guava etc should be eaten a lot in food so that the stomach should remain clean and there should not be any constipation .
Lots of water should be consumed .
The cancer of skin is generally of three types .
Squamous cell cancer , basal cell cancer , melanin cell cancer .
The melanin skin cancer is the most dangerous of all the three cancers mentioned above .
While basal cell cancer is the least dangerous .
The cancer of skin generally appears in the form of a small tumor .
This tumor can appear on any part of the body .
Like hand , leg , face etc. .
The tumor can be of normal color or of black color .
In the initial stage the tumor is painless and therefore we commit serious mistake , because there is no pain in the tumor .
Therefore , the patient does not pay attention towards the treatment of the tumor .
When the tumor grows pain develops in it and then on showing to the doctor it is found out that the tumor is of cancer .
Which has spread in other parts of the body as well .
At times cancer appears in the form of a small wound .
The problem is again that in condition of cancer occurring in wound generally there is no pain .
The patient does not pay attention to it as it does not pain .
The cancer of the wound increases and a stage comes when pain starts occurring in that .
But by this time cancer is already spread in other parts of the body .
At times cancer appears in hairless tumors .
Therefore , do not forget any tumor .
No matter if it is proved by the tests that the tumor is not harmful but when cancer would occur in such tumors , this is not known .
Still if harmless tumor persists in the body then be cautious of the following symptoms .
Formation of wound in the tumor , rapid growth of tumor , pain in the tumor , change of color in the tumor .
If any of the above mentioned symptoms appear in any of the harmless tumors then be cautious and immediately consult the doctor .
Cancer of any organ in body spreads either through blood or through lymph vessels : the cancer which spreads through blood is more harmful .
Because they spread very fast in all the organs of the body .
Definitely get tested each tumor appearing on the skin .
If a tumor persists for years then in the situation of the growth of the tumor , getting tested is a must .
If pain starts happening in the tumor of the skin then get cautious and definitely get the test for cancer done .
If wound appears in tumor then also getting attentive is important .
Each such wound appearing on the skin , which does not get healed in 2 weeks , signals towards cancer .
Generally , the cancer of skin spreads through lump vessels alone .
Therefore , generally the cancer of skin spreads very slowly indeed .
The skin of the place which has cancer , from there it goes to the nearby lymph gland and from there it then goes to central lymph glands .
Treatment of the cancer of the skin : along with the cancerous skin the healthy skin is also cut and removed .
By which the danger of cancer being left back is removed .
At times , along with the cancer infested skin the lymph glands are also cut and removed .
It depends on the rapidity of the cancer whether cancerous gland has to be removed or not .
Carelessness should not be towards long persisting wound , towards warts and painless tumor , towards genitals .
The cancer of the skin of the genitals is different from the cancer of the skin of the other organs .
Although the beginning of cancer starts just with a tiny tumor or wound , but the tumors and wound stay hidden beneath the skin of the genitals and by the time it is diagnosed it becomes very late .
At times this delay is also due to the hesitation in talking about the matters of genitals .
Not only cancer but other diseases of genitals also continues to grow due to hesitation and its proper treatment does not take place .
In the condition of cancer of female genitals : the skin of the genitals are cut and removed .
If the cancer has spread up to the lymph glands then the lymph glands also have to be cut and removed .
The meaning of arthritis is ` swelling of the joints ' and more than 100 different types of swelling of joints have been put under the category of arthritis .
Arthritis disease can take in its captive at any age .
Arthritis disease is seen in children as well .
The arthritis disease is a common thing in people of 50 years and more .
The arthritis disease in them occurs in grim condition and is more painful .
As the age increases , the cases of arthritis also increase and 3 out of every 5 people have been seen as the patients of arthritis in the age group of less than 65 .
If the diagnosis and treatment of arthritis is not done in time then by this a lot of harm occurs to the joints and bones of the body .
In fact arthritis is a disease affecting the women world over .
Which along with being a shock absorber also reduces the friction of the bones .
But in the patients of arthritis , this cartilage weakens due to abrasion or else gets fully damaged because of which intense pain in the joints , weakness is felt and swelling also occurs .
Because of the damage to this cartilage the arthritis infested patient faces difficulties in activities like walking , climbing up the stairs and sitting down or taking bath by sitting on the ground .
Generally if there is persisting pain in joints of knees , elbows , ankles , shoulders , neck , hands etc . and if there is intense pain in normal activities like walking , getting up from the chair , bending while working or bending to pick something from down then the signal of this matter should be understood that the time to consult the doctor has come .
Because of arthritis not just there is swelling and stiffness in the joints but several times redness is also seen in the joints .
If the correct diagnosis of arthritis is done in time then relief from the disease is possible to a very great extent .
The meaning of quick treatment is less damage to the joints and because of this the patient has to suffer less pain .
Generally the advice of surgery is also given when the arthritis becomes serious .
Similarly the patients in whom arthritis has reached the initial stage .
For them the options like unicompartmental knee resurfacing and hip resurfacing are very beneficial .
In condition of arthritis affecting the entire joint the total hip replacement  TKR  is useful .
The meaning of TKR is not this that a metal implant is fixed by removing the knee of the patient .
In fact in the TKR procedure a new layer is put at the end of the bones .
In this way the knee becomes totally safe and complete bending and bowing becomes possible .
Knee transplant is the latest technique in which the patient gets relief in various activities like walking , bending while gardening , sitting while driving or exercising , climbing up and down the stairs .
In the context of our country it takes new meanings as well because the joints have important role in several types of daily activities like bending or sitting on the floor .
Bending up to 155 degree is possible by high flexion knees and the patient can again come back to his daily routine .
The patients who have already got the rotating platform high flexion knee transplant today experience much more satisfaction and they can finish their daily activity in a much better way .
The riddance from an epidemic like arthritis can be obtained by proper medical care , options of surgery and by adopting balanced life style and proper habits .
And the patient does not have to undergo the suffering condition of pain and decrease in the physical activities .
Apart from medicine and surgery balanced diet also plays an important role in combating with this disease in a better way .
The important things which should be kept in mind in matters of food are as follows .
Increase the quantities of vitamins , minerals , antioxidants and nutritive substances and by doing this you can keep your weight under control .
The state of arthritis becomes severe by the increase of obesity .
Consume more and more of fresh fruits and vegetables and especially eat more VitaminC rich fruits like apples , oranges , cherry , peppers , tomatoes , beet root , sweet potato etc so that the joints stay protected .
With fibrous food like whole grain , barley and brown rice also one gets help in maintaining health and especially joints .
Refrain from taking fried food .
Consume more and more of calcium rich food  like diary products , dry fruits , soya milk , fish  etc. .
Calcium rich food keep the bones safe .
Eat such food by which Vitamin D stays in the body .
Our body does not produce calcium , that is obtained from food .
By doing regular exercise also the muscles around the joints become strong .
The density of bones increase by this and the abrasion of joints also decrease .
The habit of alcohol spoils the life of the best of men .
Being irritated of their habit the family members constantly keep trying that from anywhere they should get such a treatment by which the addiction of the drunkard turned member can be removed .
At times this situation is such that the drunkard on getting fed up of his own bad habit thinks of quitting alcohol .
In such situations they start seeking support of such solutions by which they get harmed in place of being profited .
Even after having different types of treatment they get sadness alone .
Help is also taken from the rehabilitation centres but there is limit also for those who help in coming out of the cyclone of intoxication .
In getting rid of the intoxication of alcohol will power of the drunkard works more than treatment .
Even if the family members of the drunkard take him forcibly to the alcohol rehabilitation center and there his treatment is started , his treatment would not be successful till the time he himself develops the desire within himself that he has to quit alcohol .
Naltrekson is such chemical which block the opioid receptors situated in the brain responsible for the feeling of happiness received from intoxication after drinking alcohol .
Apart from taking naltrekson in the form of oral tablets it can also be taken in the form of injection .
But it has been proved by the experiments that taking injection is more effective .
Since naltrekson is intoxication preventive in the purest form therefore till the time it is there in the body no type of excitement would be felt by him on doing any type of intoxication .
The special mixture of naltrekson is made to reach 3-4 metres beneath the skin by making an incision of 1 cm in the lower part of the stomach or behind the arm .
The benefit in this condition is this that on not taking the medicine by the patient or on forgetting to eat medicine the medicine continues to show its effect .
In naltrekson implant also it is important that the patient is kept under the naltrekson treatment for at least 12 months .
Often it happens that those who get oral treatment done they stop the treatment in middle .
While the treatment should last for at least 1 year , along with it the quantity of alcohol is also reduced .
One can get harmed by the consumption of any intoxicating item be it alcohol or smack or any other intoxicating item with naltrekson implant .
In bacterial dysentery the body becomes weak after becoming skinny and fever starts developing .
In the extreme case of bacterial dysentery there is repeated tendency of releasing fecus in the patient but each time very less fecus is discharged .
In bacterial dysentery together with discharge of fecus , vomiting also takes place and the patient feels extremely thirsty .
In bacterial dysentery the tongue gets dried , extreme deficiency of water molecules and the symptoms of food poisoning becomes visible .
In the fecus of the patient of amoebic dysentery entamoeba hystolytica are found and in the stool test of bacterial dysentery bacteria are found .
In the preventive treatment of bacterial dysentery also it is very important to protect edible and drinking items from the flies .
In order to be safe from the bacterial dysentery the fecal release should be done at a definite place and phenyl should be used regularly at such a place .
The patient suffering from bacterial dysentery should be kept warm in bed .
The fomentation of turpentine on stomach is beneficial in bacterial dysentery .
If contracted bacterial dysentery only boiled water should be used for the first 24 hours .
The other treatments of bacterial dysentery are similar to amoebic dysentery .
Rabies is a viral disease which happens in mammals generally by the biting of dog or other animals .
The central nervous system gets affected by rabies and if not treated immediately the death of the patient is inevitable .
The virus of rabies gradually reaches to the central nervous system through the medium of peripheral nervous system .
The effect of rabies takes up to several months to appear .
On the basis of its location in the uterus it is of three types .
Sub mucous , intramural , sub serous .
This can be one or more than one in number .
Night blindness is a disease of eyes .
When sonography is done because of some other reason then it is found out that there is a tumor in the uterus .
Major among other symptoms of fibroid are .
In day time everything is clearly visible to the patient of night blindness , but at the night time he is not able to see even the nearby things clearly .
In night blindness there is discharge of white color .
In night blindness the eye lens appears to be consisting of minute hole and triangular shape becomes visible behind the cornea .
The care of new born infant .
The infant must be well taken care of at the time of birth .
The nose , throat , mouth , anus etc of the new born baby must be cleaned before it takes the first breath .
Tie the umbilical cord .
The physical investigation of the infant must be done .
For all types of tests for normal conditions post birth like nose , ears , throat , neck , breast , arms , genitals and anus etc should be done .
The new born should be wiped with soft cloth after birth and it must be given bath only after one week .
The infant must be weighed immediately after birth and thereafter it should be given to the mother for breast feeding after wiping it .
The newly born baby must be kept close to the body of the mother .
The child can be saved from hypothermia this way .
The chances of infection in a newly born infant is the maximum , therefore the baby must be saved from infection .
The best way to protect a newly born infant from infection is to lift it after cleaning ones hand with soap beforehand .
Do not take the child to a place where other children are sick .
The role of mother is main in the care of the infant .
The mother should be given the correct information about keeping gap in the birth of next child and the time-table for the inoculations .
Each mother should be educated to identify the symptoms of danger in her child so that she can immediately take her child to the doctor if needed .
If the new born baby is of less weight , is in sick state then it should not be distanced from his mother .
His entire care should be done in front of his parents only .
By parental touch or by taking it in the lap the tension of child decreases .
National Family Planning program was started in the form of sponsored program by the government .
The aim of national family planning program was to keep the population steady in the face of the needs of the national development .
The main aim of the family planning program was to reduce birth rate right from the beginning in order to achieve this aim , for which the various techniques of family planning was to be encouraged in the masses .
The meaning of birth and child health point of view is to accept unanimous and composite view towards the issues of contraception and mother-child health .
Solid methods to control population growth .
Population growth has been the chief problem of the developing countries .
In order to stop population growth immediately very solid steps have to be take .
Firstly , it is needed to attack poverty .
Appropriate success can not be achieved in this direction without removing this factor mainly responsible for population increase in countries like India .
The nation looks infested with scarcity from all the four sides .
Baldness is not a disease .
At present there has been a flood of the centres for treating baldness in big cities .
Generally , hair starts falling due to high fever , typhoid , syphilis , influenza and lack of blood etc. .
Generally baldness is a genetic condition but it begins mostly in the head with the start of itching and irritation .
It has often been seen that the hair of 20-30 year old men falls gradually and after some time they become bald to a great extent .
Therefore it can be prevented in the beginning with safety measures .
It happens very fast in women of less age but the situation of complete baldness arises very less in them .
This is a scientific fact that the hair of healthy people grow everyday and in the place of hair that fall during combing new hair grow on their own from time to time .
Various skin diseases like herpes , ringworm make such a layer on the scalp that the hair starts falling and baldness comes .
The use of cosmetics like oils to prevent hair fall and baldness , the soaps to wash head make such cases even more serious .
Staying in intense light or staying in sunlight for long , special types of beautifying cosmetics and techniques like bleaching and curling of the hair etc . encourage baldness .
Special hair designs in which the hair is twisted and broken and making pony tail especially while sleeping at night and by putting needles and rings in the hair etc may also become the reason of baldness .
Because of deficiency of thyroid the hair start falling by becoming thin , weak and dry .
Along with keeping the body healthy with nutritious food the hair can also be made beautiful dense and strong .
Unbalanced diet not just stops the continuous growth of hair but it also makes bald very fast .
Because of any ups and downs happening in the life hair start falling and complete baldness may also come .
During pregnancy and after pregnancy the falling of hair in women is a common thing .
Tiredness and tension are the chief causes of heart disease so it also has a large impact on body and hair .
Some professions also do not stay away from affecting the hair .
The hair of a thirty year old man in England was found to come out in bunches while his hew hair were also growing .
After the chemical tests it was found that the quantity of mercury was more in his blood vessels because of which his hair used to fall .
It was found after enquiring that mercury was used in the industry in which he was working because of which the mercury slowly diffused into his body gradually .
Because of eating habits the hair often falls .
Because of excessive feelings and being emotional disorders occur in the head and it is natural for the hair to fall .
Increase of weight or obesity is a chief health problem .
Most men-women , be it adults or youth , are tensed with the increasing obesity or increase in weight of their body .
If the increase in weight and obesity becomes a hindrance for the activities of the body then actually it becomes a matter of concern for every person .
Normally , the main symptom of obesity is that the height of the body should be in proportion to the weight of the body .
If the weight is more than the physical height then the body is fat otherwise the body comes in the category of being thin .
Two main reasons of weight and obesity have been told under the health science .
First , genetic meaning by descent .
Second , because of food habits meaning activities related to diet .
Eating more than hunger , not doing exercise or physical labor , leading a life of lethargic etc . come under this .
People who do not do physical labor and exercise , along with the less flow of blood in their body , in places like belly , hips and waist .
Cholesterol  fat  accumulates in the blood carrying vessels as a result of which diseases like high blood pressure , indigestion , heart disease and diabetes occur .
At present as the consciousness of people are increasing towards healthy life and pure and plain healthy diet and exercise people are becoming aware of the dangers owing to increase in weight and obesity .
The diseases owing to obesity are also becoming a subject of concern for people .
Advice of reducing weight and obesity is given by the doctors to the patients of high blood pressure , diabetes and heart disease .
The women escape from food which increase weight and obesity and practice self control in order to keep their body slim and attractive .
It is generally seen that in order to reduce the weight of the body and not to let obesity come the lasses take very less food under dieting and do unnecessary exercise .
By doing unnecessary exercise several times harmful effects are seen on the body .
The other problem which comes by this is that if the weight of the body is more or less than required then along with ill effects on health weakness may also arise in the body .
In the report released by World Health Organisation , it was indicated in 2002 that among the ten chief dangers for health the biggest danger is that of the reduced weight .
If the weight of the body reduces without dieting or without exercise then this also is considered to be the symptom of a serious disease .
It is important to take the advice of the doctor prior to dieting .
It is essential for the body to get complete nutrition according to the daily needs because of which it can work well and there should not be any weakness .
The following matters have to be paid attention to in this context .
The harmony between food and habits is a must then only the effort towards the direction of reducing weight  obesity becomes meaningful .
The body construction and the food related needs of every human being is different according to his actions .
Copying someone or comparing oneself with the other is waste .
Some food items like fast  junk food , fried substances come under the food of negative calorie .
The hunger does get satiated by eating food items like fast  junk food .
But the body does not get any benefit from this .
Gradually one should try to evade it by strong will power .
Dieting is done by several girls and women to reduce their obesity and weight .
Positive results of reducing obesity come forward .
The person who is dieting should diet after taking proper consultation .
There are many dangerous diseases in the present world - TB , Malaria , disease of heart , Cancer , Tension and HIV etc. .
These diseases are more dangerous than SARS , These diseases have caused the death of more people in comparison to SARS .
Then also SARS has attracted the attention of more and more people .
There are many similarities and difficulties in SARS and other diseases .
It is important here that SARS has emerged as a new problem , this is a new disease which is non-curable .
SARS is spreading due to infection .
SARS today is the synonym of that disease which occurs due to corona virus .
Because of SARS disease the infected person gets high  104 degree Fahrenheit  fever .
Dry cough starts coming and there is difficulty in breathing .
SARS is called hyper active respiratory syndrome .
The initial symptoms of SARS resemble pneumonia .
But if SARS is not diagnosed in time or there is carelessness in treatment then death takes place .
The history of SARS is not very old .
The recognition of the disease was done for the first time in China .
The first patient was discovered in aeroplane on February 26 , 2003 .
The symptoms of the patient infected with SARS are illusionary .
The infected person gets fever of 104 degree Fahrenheit or more and he also feels cold with this .
Headache and vomiting starts happening .
Breathing becomes difficult in the patient .
The symptoms like pneumonia appear .
The one who is attacked dies in three - six days .
In the whole world there is a situation of illusion regarding the patients and the symptoms of SARS .
Thus , Suspect Case and Probable Case have been defined .
The formula to stay constantly healthy .
Uncountable types of bacteria and virus are spread in our atmosphere .
By the medium of our breath we pull in thousands of bacteria and virus with the air into our body and then also they do not have any ill effect on our body .
At times when our immune system falls weak due to some reason then only we become infested with flu or cough-cold or any other disease or allergy .
With food also we make several disease bearer microbes reach our body .
Such microbes mostly die when coming in contact with the saliva of our mouth or else the acid of our stomach .
If by any reason this does not happen in the body of any person then he is troubled by the poisoning of the food .
After all why does it happen that in similar situations some people fall sick while some other people continue to be healthy .
How does the immune system work .
At first the body protects us from the external disease causing agents .
A type of antibacterial substance continues to be produced on our skin by coming in contact of which there is destruction of various types of disease causing bacteria and microbes .
The nature protects us by other means as well .
Our mouth , nose and eyes also become the way of entry into the body for the microbes .
The saliva in the mouth is antibacterial .
A layer of mucous is spread over the nasal cavity and the lungs .
The microbes which do not die immediately , they become inactive on sticking with the mucous .
There is a type of enzyme in the mucous and the tear that flows from our eyes which is called ` lysosome ' .
Lysosome by breaking the wall of the cell destroys the disease causing bacteria .
The beneficial bacteria named ` lactobacillus ' staying in the intestines and genitals saves us from yeast and the other harmful microbes .
This way our immunity works as a protective shield against the mischief of just any disease causing microbe .
If by any reason any antigen like the disease causing bacteria , virus , fungus , parasite or any other external substance enter in the body by penetrating the upper protective shield then the immunity action of cells and humoral begins .
The scientists believe that apart from the other parts there are three different types of cells and three other soluble proteins in the immunity system .
The cells and proteins can be seen in the blood flowing in our body .
The cells and proteins together become capable of initiating the immunity activity .
There are three main types of cells - red blood corpuscles or erythrocytes , white blood corpuscles or leukocytes and platelets or thrombocytes that is , the cells which coagulate the blood .
Worm - this is a common disease in children .
Objectively the worms are of several types - round worm , magnetic worm , thread worm , tape worm and other diseases of worm .
Round worm affects children the most .
The symptoms of round worm .
Less hunger , stomach pain , mild fever , chattering of teeth , micturition in bed , cough , itching in anus and many other abnormal symptoms are of worms .
At times the round worms come together as a unit and produce obstruction in the intestines .
Because of round worm there may be pain in the stomach and vomiting .
The hook worms get stuck to the intestine and they reduce blood there by sucking it from there .
The eggs of round worm reach the intestines through polluted food and blood .
The round worm become the cause of several symptoms after maturing .
The eggs of hook worms hatch on warm and wet ground and their embryos reach the thin blood vessels by penetrating the bare feet of human body .
Tape worm reaches the body by eating contaminated meat .
Their diagnosis is possible by stool examination .
Similarly , naru is also a type of contagious disease which occurs by drinking unclean water of ponds , lakes , tanks etc. .
The water in rural areas is generally available from these sources only .
Thus , naru disease is generally found more in rural population .
The naru worms reach the digestive system by drinking contaminated water where the naru worms come out of the Cyclopes and enter the tissues of the skin and begin to grow .
The worm generally produces a wart in that part of the body which often comes in contact with water .
In such situation the naru worm releases its larva in the water .
The symptoms occurring due to naru worms are generally seen in the lower part of the body .
The part of the body where the worms come out , there is intense itching and then inflammation occurs and then a hole forms .
Because of this the symptoms of high fever , headache and vomiting appear .
In order to prevent naru disease the water of tanks , lakes and ponds etc should be used only after filtering .
The diagnosis of naru disease can also be done by putting some chemical injections in bone marrow .
The disease which spread through the microbes related to water .
In this disease several types of malaria , filaria , dengue and yellow fever etc . are included .
The disease of malaria spreads from one person to the other through a total of four sub species of mosquitoes named plasmodium falciparum , plasmodium vivax , plasmodium ovale and plasmodium malaria .
In the symptoms of malaria there is high fever , nausea , headache and very profuse sweating .
By affecting the pancreas and nervous system malaria becomes the reason of loss of consciousness and at times death .
Generally the mosquitoes bite at night .
The disease of filaria spreads because of the bite of mosquitoes named culecs pipians at night .
Dengue , yellow fever and other microbial infection spreads through another sub species of mosquito named andes egyptys .
Aedes Aegypti mosquito spreads yellow fever mainly in the urban regions by communicating virus from one person to the body of another person .
In the chemical composing of water the roles of nitrate , fluoride and arsenic are very important in the ascertainment of the suitability of the drinking water .
But its high density may lead to the growth of various lethal diseases in the ling run .
Or it enters our body through the medium of water and then it gets converted to nitrite .
This nitrite again reacts with diamine , amide and carbonate and forms n-nitroso compound which is very cancerous .
For the ascertainment of the suitability of fluoride rich drinks the role of fluoride is also very important .
On consumption of long term or excessive fluoride rich water , many types of disease occur in man and cattle .
The disease occurring due to the excessiveness of fluoride is called ` fluorosis ' .
Polio eradication program : problem and solution .
Polio is such a disease which is not lethal but by making the people handicapped it makes them abnormal for the entire life .
In this disease affecting in childhood generally , the growth of legs stop and they are left small and thin .
Consequently polio infested person has to walk as a lame person or with the help of crutches for the whole life .
Often the patients of polio become fat when the age increases because of which their problems increase even further .
The reason of polio disease is polio mellitus virus .
In order to free India from polio mellitus virus and to save people from becoming victims of polio in thousands of number every year , the pulse polio program was started by the World Health Organisation which was established in April 7 1948 .
The pulse polio program was started on an experimental basis for the first time in Delhi in 1994-95 .
Being encouraged of the reach of pulse polio and the support received to the pulse polio in Delhi this program was executed in the whole country in 1995-96 .
Till now there have been several rounds of pulse polio program in the whole country .
The main aim of pulse polio has been only this that no child should be left devoid of taking polio vaccine in hilly places , desert places , forest areas or in any far distanced places .
The pulse polio program will continue for three more years now .
As a result of the comprehensive mission for the eradication of polio in 1998 the number of new cases in the whole country has only been 1934 .
Even after that because of the continuing pulse polio program the number of new cases in 1999 came down to 1126 .
In 2000 this number had reached to 265 and by October 2001 only 100 new cases came within the grasp of polio .
At the same time in 2001 there were only six such states where new cases of polio were witnessed .
Out of these more in Uttar Pradesh  82 cases  and after that 13 cases in Bihar had come forward .
The government had organised the pulse polio vaccination day only twice in 2001 but due to the increase of the number of polio cases to 1630 now the polio vaccination is being done 6 times .
Till May 10th , 2003 whatever cases were registered for polio in the whole country , the maximum 24 out of them were found Uttar Pradesh and 23 were found in Bengal .
Apart from these 8 in Bihar . in Madhya Pradesh . in Rajasthan and 3 in Delhi are included .
By August 21 , 2004 a total of 34 cases had come forward in the country , out of which 20 were of Uttar Pradesh . of Bihar . of Maharashtra and one case each of Tamil Nadu , Karnataka , Delhi , Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal .
The government had aimed to eradicate polio from the country by 2007 .
On September 6 , 2007 a case of 11 month old girl has come forward in Jabalpur .
There has been increase in the type of P3 polio and P1 type of polio has also not been destroyed from the roots .
In 2007 1,389 cases were registered in the whole world out of which 864 cases were found in India .
It is known that because of the increase of the cases of polio in India , it has to face criticism from those countries of the world who have eradicated the disease of polio within them .
According to the Ministry of the Centre for Family Welfare the virus of polio has now become limited to some selected districts of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar .
Because the virus of polio is found only in the body of human beings its complete eradication is possible .
For this in order to ascertain the abundance of substances  antibody  to fight against polio in human body dose of two drops of sobin vaccine is given through mouth and the dose of Salk vaccine is given through injection under polio immunity vaccine .
India is a country of huge population .
70 percent population of the country stays in rural areas where the health services present are of extremely low standard .
This is the reason that the infant mortality rate is very high in India .
Although the reasons for infant mortality are various and different .
Pulse Polio Mission is a national health safety child mission under the Family Welfare department of Indian Government in which in order to keep children of less than 5 years polio free medicine is made to drink free of cost .
The main purpose of pulse polio mission is to make the children free from physical handicap .
The main base of this mission is to make the pulse polio mission reach to every house and giving the medicine  vaccine  to each child up to 5 years .
For which the Indian government makes the mass aware through the medium of advertisement .
Pulse Polio Mission is actually a team work in which there is equal contribution of each member .
According to the survey of the World Health Organisation more than 15 crore people fall ill due to malaria every year and more than 50 lac patients die .
Malaria epidemic is a contagious disease .
Malaria spreads from mosquito named female anopheles .
Mosquitoes are omnipresent and diseases like dengue , chickengunia and filaria  eliphantiasis  also occur from these .
In malaria disease fever comes following chills and also following sweating .
10 -14 days after the biting of the mosquito the symptoms become visible and the person falls sick .
Because of being an infectious disease it can also occur from one person to the other person .
Apart from chill there is also vomiting in malaria .
There is intense headache in malaria .
The patient may even die if the treatment is not done immediately , because by this the fever rises up to 106 degree Fahrenheit .
After the infection there is lack of blood in the body of the person and the liver and spleen grow large .
Abortion may also occur in pregnant women due to malaria .
Female anopheles mosquito lays its eggs in stagnant water like ponds , lakes , wells , rivers , drains etc. .
These eggs are very small and they keep floating on the surface of the water .
Generally , the eggs and the larva which come out of the eggs thereafter get a place to hide behind the grass or the plants by the side of water .
Larva comes out of the egg in 24-28 hours of the laying of eggs .
Larva gets converted to pupa in 5-6 days , which start taking dips in water .
In 2 or 3 days it flies away becoming an adult mosquito from pupa .
Adult mosquito rests at 45 degree angle from the surface .
This way while becoming mosquitoes from egg their enemy is gambusia fish which eats their eggs in the state of larva , pupa .
Tank kept open on the terrace near the house , useless thrown tyres , cooler , kitchen garden , fountains for decoration , pots and vases , broken vessels , uncovered vessels , disposable glasses , stagnant water near hand pump or tap , wells which are not brought into use , cistern of animals , the stagnant water in the paddy fields , the accumulated watering the monsoon season in the tantrum of the trees , the lakes surrounded with grass , marshy land and the stagnant water of the drains are the shelter place of the mosquitoes .
Malaria is an omnipresent problem .
There is no permanent solution to malaria and neither have the doctors of the world discovered its any inoculation .
Still for safety against mosquitoes you may get mosquito proof nets fixed on the windows and doors of your house .
Certainly put mosquito net while sleeping at night .
Put the repellent cream on the uncovered parts of the body .
In the evening burn the smoke of the leaves of need or the incense stick which drives the mosquito away .
Wear such clothes on body by which the whole body remains covered .
Least number of mosquitoes will bite by this .
In order to stop the breeding of mosquitoes do not let the water accumulate near the house , change the water of the cooler every week .
Do not let water accumulate in the broken vessels kept on the terrace .
Certainly put Gambusia fish in ponds , wells and lakes .
At the onset of malaria fever get the patient 's blood tested .
High blood pressure is dangerous for health .
Blood pressure is not such an illness that can not be controlled .
By adopting a course of abstinence and medicines it is possible to prevent the serious consequences of blood pressure .
Blood pumped from left chamber of the heart circulates in the arteries spread throughout the body and it is the very pressure exerted on the walls of the arteries by blood circulation which is called blood pressure .
The pressure generating in the systolic  shrinking  stage of heart is called systolic blood pressure and the pressure generating in the diastolic  expanding  stage of the heart , diastolic blood pressure .
The systolic blood pressure in a normal person is less than 140 m . . and the diastolic blood pressure is less than 90 m . . of mercury .
Blood pressure of a normal man should be less than 140  90 .
Because of swelling in prostrate gland and its increase in size two kinds of problems happen in urination .
One , difficulty to urinate due to pressure in the line of flow of urine and second , due to contraction in urinary passage and accumulation of urine an infection happens in it .
After that there is swelling in the wall of the urinary bladder .
Due to these complications a variety of difficulties start happening to the patient .
Like repeated urge to defecate urine , urge to urinate at night , effort while urinating at start and not only this urinating drop by drop and having pain while urinating .
The complaint of pain occurs when there is infection in urine .
Because of this complaint of stoppage of urine also occurs and relief is felt only when rubber tube is applied to take out urine .
In this type of patient there is difficulty to completely empty the bag of urine and after urinating also some amount of urine remains in the bag .
Treatment of B . . . disease .
If much enlargement has not happened in the size of the prostrate then to do the treatment neither medicine is needed nor surgery .
In B . . . advice of drinking less water while sleeping at night is given .
If there is a habit of drinking alcohol then advice of leaving it is given .
Not only this , patient is also given advice to leave tea , coffee , etc. .
If after this also the patient does not get relief then medicine is given to reduce action of muscles of prostrate gland .
T . . . : New method of surgery .
Nowadays treatment of prostrate is being done by many new methods whose names are . . . .  . . . . . And T . . . .
T . . .  . . . . . and T . . . . there is no similarity in results in treatment through all three , that is why all are not popular together in these .
Nowadays T . . . are not in use .
On the other hand treatment of prostrate through the use of laser beams is being considered the first choice of therapists .
In the treatment of prostrate T . . . is quite popular and most urologists are using this method .
This is the reason that T . . . . is called gold standard procedure .
After 72 hours discharge is given to the patient and only after a rest of 2-3 days patient can do his daily work .
In T . . . method a telescope is made to enter through the urinary passage , and prostrate is seen through the help of a light and lens attached to it .
In T . . . . method telescope stays attached to a video system .
There are many advantages of surgery by T . . . . Method .
In surgery by T . . . . method patient is given discharge from the hospital after 24 to 72 hours .
In surgery by T . . . . method , necessity of making a cut in the stomach of patient is not needed .
In surgery by T . . . method because of less time of the patient 's staying admitted chances of infection become quite reduced .
During surgery by T . . . method there is less bleeding .
In surgery by T . . . method patient recovers after only 2 to 3 days .
On treatment of prostrate by T . . . . method , after a few days there is a complaint of clot of blood coming in urine of patient many times .
The complaint of appearance of clot of blood is a common problem which can be seen in a surgery of this kind .
This happens due to rupture of small blood vessels during surgery .
Secretion increases on blood pressure increasing extremely , getting a fit of cough or in a state of excessive infection .
Many times this problem is seen years after surgery also .
If there is a mistake in detection of disease because of some reason then after later on it is prostrate cancer and its surgery is done .
In such a situation the part of place of surgery becomes stiff like stone .
The turning of the part of place of surgery becoming stiff like stone occurs because of cancer having spread reaching into the third stage .
When the growth of cancer reaches the fourth stage then it also takes the bones in its embrace .
The other problem of this surgery is that of the flow of urine becoming reduced .
To get rid of this problem therapist puts a rubber tube in the urinary passage of the patient that helps urinate .
After a few days tension in it goes away on its own because of the tube .
Increasing havoc of Asthma in childhood .
Asthma is a form of allergy .
In this the ultrasensitive breathing tubes contract on coming in contact with allergy-causing elements .
The chest muscles have to work more hard on breathing in and breathing out during respiration through contracted breathing tubes .
Due to this sound of whistle starts coming from chest .
Due to swelling in the mucous membrane of breathing tubes and increase in secretion of its glands problems like cough and phlegm also happen .
Due to contraction of breathing tubes in children during asthma , they have more distress as compared to elders .
The breathing tubes of children are thin and capacity of lungs is less .
In some children the symptoms of allergy start reducing on increase in age and they become healthy by the age of 4-5 years .
In some older children other than viral asthma attack can occur due to sensitivity towards smoke , tobacco smoke , cold , sun , etc . also .
In other children asthma attack can happen due to laughing and crying .
Gradually these children can become sensitive to dust , animal skin , fiber strands , hair , body waste etc . and on coming in contact with these asthma attack can occur .
At nearly around 20 years of age allergy is produced by pollen grain to these sensitive individuals .
In some children attack occurs due to some specific food matter .
The main causes of asthma .
To an extent allergy and asthma are also hereditary .
If parents are allergic then the chances of children being allergic are more .
Besides this on being hereditarily sensitive attack of asthma can occur on coming in contact with increasing polluted elements present in the environment , being allergic to smoke or other chemicals of motor vehicles and factories .
Dirt , dust , smell of house , smoke of fuel can produce asthma attack in children .
The chances of city children versus village children to be asthmatic are more .
Environment of cities is more polluted .
The children whose guardians or other members of home smoke inside the house chances of those children to be asthmatic are more .
Because of being afflicted with disease repeatedly children with asthma generally get physically weak .
The physical and mental development of these children could also be hindered .
The solutions of disease of Asthma .
Exceptional development has taken place in the treatment of Asthma .
With use of appropriate caution and medicines control over disease can be obtained .
By being careful and care , also the physical and mental development of the child take place in a normal way .
Give regular medicine to child with asthma according to the therapist 's advice .
Get their examination done at regular intervals .
To reduce the chances of allergy , asthma in future , children should be fed on mother 's milk .
Also , do not give solid food to babies for 4 months .
After this gradually start giving fruit , vegetables first and then grains .
In children brought up drinking mother 's milk chances of allergy are less as compared to cow milk drinking children .
Make the small children lie down on soft , cotton bed sheets and cover them .
If the child is asthmatic then do not make him sleep on a dusty bed .
Entire preparation of letting smoke out of the kitchen should be done .
In children asthma can occur due to allergy by animal hair , skin , hair , excrement , etc also .
If the child is asthmatic then do not let pet animals inside the house .
Give minimum amount of ice cream , cold drinks , chocolates , chaat , fast food etc to children victim to asthma .
Now for treatment of Asthma , spray taken from the mouth is used .
Immediate relief is felt with use of spray taken from the mouth .
Because of less amount of medicine chances of adverse effect are also less .
In case of children getting asthma the disease can be controlled by maintaining caution and by giving appropriate treatment .
While leading a normal life children can participate in all kinds of work and games .
Hepatitis . can be more dangerous than AIDS .
Hepatitis-B is a common disease happening worldwide whose virus infects the liver in a serious manner .
Virus of Hepatitis-B produce swelling in the liver because of which it can not function properly .
This disease is even more infectious than AIDS because it goes very easily into body of another person via blood .
Just one virus of Hepatitis B is enough to spread this disease .
Other than blood it also spreads by other fluids and liquid substances coming out of body .
Like defecation , mother 's milk , tears , drool and open wounds .
By eating medicine on time and by following the advice of doctor 95 % people get better in 6 months .
The causes behind spreading of Hepatitis-B are the following .
If blood of infected person is transfused in the body of a healthy person or the shot which was given to an infected person is given to a normal person then this virus goes from the infected person to the healthy person .
The most important causes of Hepatitis B happen to be at the time of child birth from the womb of infected mothers .
During this , the blood which touches the body of the child , the virus situated in that infected blood goes inside the child as soon as coming in contact with the blood of the child .
Along with India in all the countries of Asia this type of infection spreads a lot and new born baby gets infected from infancy itself .
In the field of athletics when an infected individual gets wounded and if his blood somehow comes in contact with the blood of a healthy person then it spreads very easily .
It also spreads exceedingly among those who consume drugs via needle .
If an applied syringe taken from an infected person is used by another person then virus goes in the healthy person .
When someone in man and woman is infected with Hepatitis B and they have unprotected sexual intercourse then by this also the virus goes in the healthy person .
The way virus of AIDS spreads that way virus of Hepatitis B also spreads .
Even 1 part of blood of a person infected with Hepatitis B is capable of spreading Hepatitis B .
Hepatitis B is more dangerous than AIDS can be reckoned by this fact that the number of people that die because of Hepatitis B in 1 day is same as the number of people that die with the infection of AIDS in a year .
In India healthy person is also infected with Hepatitis B .
In many individuals despite being Hepatitis B positive they do not have the knowledge that they have Hepatitis B because this virus is unable to affect that individual too much .
If Hepatitis B infects young people then 95 % get free of the disease in 6 months only . Only the remaining 5 % stay infected with the disease .
The main symptoms of Hepatitis B .
In the first state of infection the person has symptoms like that of viral fever .
Not feeling hungry , feeling nauseous , getting fever , these symptoms stay for 5 . days and after 7 days eyes start becoming yellow and urine becomes yellow .
Which is called jaundice in common tongue .
Jaundice keeps increasing till 2 to 4 weeks .
In 95 % people it gets treated in 2 to 4 weeks .
On getting Hepatitis B it should be shown to a gastroenterologist immediately .
For treatment of Hepatitis B or jaundice several types of superstitions are in effect in society .
Therefore for its treatment one should save oneself from falling into any kind of superstition .
Vaccination : To save liver from virus of Hepatitis B a very effective vaccine is available .
Those who have been given this vaccine in them in 99 % 's bodies effective protective disease antibodies are produced .
Vaccine of Hepatitis B is helpful in stopping infection of jaundice .
This vaccine is to be given to people thrice .
In baby being born the first vaccine immediately after taking birth , second after 1 month and third after 6 months .
In adults also it is given thrice .
Treatment for prevention of Hepatitis B .
In blood of person infected with Hepatitis B this virus stays alive for 7 days .
Hence other person should not use the towel , brush , comb of infected person .
For acupuncture everyone should use new needles .
Otherwise via these needles also virus of infected person will go into a healthy person .
Razor of an infected person should not be brought in use by another person .
Infection can also spread by defecation of infected person .
Therefore a healthy person should make use of toilet after complete cleaning of it or if possible another one .
While having sexual intercourse infected person should surely make use of condom .
If a person is Hepatitis B positive and if all other members of his family have not been given vaccine then vaccine should be given .
Dissolve 100-250 grams sugar in water and drink daily during meals .
Eat pulses  2 . bowls  , khichdi , porridge , rice , potatoes , sago porridge , sweet potatoes , rice puffs .
Eat more green leafy vegetables .
Take milk and fresh curd , not sour curd .
Eat less egg , fish .
Do not consume liqueur , bidi , cigarette , zarda at all .
Precautions from Hepatitis B .
Person infected with Hepatitis B should absolutely keep himself from fatigue .
Keep oneself from too much athletics or running around .
Do not pick up heavy things or do not do very hard labor .
Do not be careless in treatment of spine tumor .
In human body other body parts are attached to the spine in such a way that it can move body around according to its own convenience .
All daily jobs done by humans are effected by ` spinal cord ' situated in body .
On this Earth most developed is the very human mind which thinks for sure but it is given consequence by ` spinal cord ' only .
In body role of spinal cord safe in the backbone is like an electric wire , like on pressing a switch bulb turns on .
but electricity reaches the bulb through the wire only .
Just like this , in getting every job finished , role of spinal cord is foremost .
Spine happens to be the base of the whole body and rest of the bones are joined to each other like the ends of a staff .
Back bone not being straight like a staff is made of 33 vertebrae and between every two vertebrae there is a disc .
At the posterior side of back bone there are many tiny joints .
It is these discs and joints that impart the ability to the back bone , that we can bend on all four sides .
As bones of other parts of body get worn with age , just like that back bone also gets worn .
In many people due to the amount of water being less disc tears so there is waist pain .
This pain can go from the neck towards the hand or the waist towards the foot .
Now treatment of tumor in spine has been considered very hard but today due to a lot of techniques it has become easy .
In spine tumor most common are those tumors in which cancer is in some other part of the body and tumor has occurred in the bone .
In this prostrate cancer is also included .
It is called metastasis .
In our country most of the spine tumor patients are of this category .
In spine tumor other than backache there is danger of paralysis in legs due to pressure on nerves .
Other than tumor of spine there can be tumor in spinal cord .
The unique thing about this tumor is that it can occur at any age .
In treatment of this , other than removing the bone , as soon as treatment from chemotherapy and radiotherapy is possible it is good .
Because at a later stage patient does not get any benefit from it .
Treatment of spinal cord is only surgery .
The direct relation of back ache is with back bone .
According to ` Spine Society of India ' 10 to 15 crore people above 30 years of age are patients of backache .
To escape from backache however modern technique of operation is available in country but there is no better treatment than precaution .
In our spine between every two vertebra there is a thin , flexible membrane or cushion which is called an inter-vertebra disc .
By this flexibility comes in spine and it works like a spring .
Many times due to imbalance in muscles else by suddenly picking up weight or by suddenly bending the body , the part in the inner side of the intervertebral disc which is very soft , by shifting , comes towards the hole between two vertebrae .
By this pressure is exerted on the nerves there and pain is felt anywhere from waist to leg .
Tingling and weakness is felt in legs .
Nowadays for treatment of slip disc , surgery like spinal endoscopy has become possible .
Firstly it is important to know what is the cause behind slip disc .
If by working too much backache or waist pain is occurring then it will get better by resting .
Do not keep body in tension .
Do not pick up too much weight , prevent constipation .
Develop habit of exercise from start , climbing stairs and strolling at a brisk pace is a good exercise .
Do not just work , also take rest .
Keep your sitting posture right , take a balanced diet .
In meals include vegetables with Calcium .
Take green vegetables and vitamin D .
Diseases of thoracic spine and VAT surgery .
Nowadays due to increasing use of computer eruption of pain in neck is increasing fast .
In big cities of India and in metropolitan cities , in the face of increasing use of computer there is a rapid increase in number of people afflicted with waist pain .
From children to aged everyone can be affected by waist pain .
Increasing age , heavy physical work , people working in the same condition for a long time  like secretary , receptionist , workers of call center  , people who pick up heavy loads get affected more .
If it is the case of It is treatment then several kinds of treatments are also present .
Bed rest , injection , surgical treatment , spinal fusion , disc transplant , vertebroplasty , pinhole surgery and minimum invasive surgery , etc. .
Now the beginning of a new surgery has been done and it is , VAT surgery  Video Assisted Thoracoscopy  .
Today diseases related to backbone have increased a lot .
Till now surgery of thoracoscopic spine  which happens to be behind the chest  is very difficult and excruciating .
For this the surgery was possible only by cutting the ribs and by removing the heart and lungs to one side , the side effects of which used to be very serious .
But now by VAT surgery it has become possible to treat these diseases very easily by cutting and ripping .
What are the common diseases of thoracic spine ?
In thoracic spine like neck and waist all diseases are possible , like slip disc , tumor , infection like T . . fracture , hunchback , etc .
In diseases of thoracic spine behind the chest , there is pain in waist and tension in chest .
This pain can sometimes go down to the legs .
With this it can produce numbness in legs , difficulty in walking and in daily activities .
The cause behind all these difficulties is pressure on nerves .
Now this pressure can be easily reduced via VAT surgery .
By this the distortion of waist in patients of hunchback can be removed easily .
The benefits of VAT surgery .
In VAT surgery all those surgeries are possible through a thin telescope by reaching the backbone while watching on a TV screen , which were possible before on cutting open the chest .
The whole VAT surgery gets over in only 1-2 hours .
The main advantage of VAT is that patient can start walking around from next day , there is no risk of bleeding or infection and patient gets a discharge from the hospital in 3 days .
With this , for patients of hunchback , deformation of waist can be easily reduced .
Cancer of gall bladder can be fatal .
In cancer of gall bladder there is no pain from the start .
Gall bladder closes because of cancer .
Because of which jaundice can happen to the patient in the last stage of his life .
Gall bladder can be removed by inserting a s stunt in the infected part present in the gall bladder of patient of cancer .
So that the patient does not face much trouble in last stage .
It would be better that the patient is admitted to such a hospital where there are better stomach disease experts so that the anguish of patient is reduced at the end of his life .
Cancer of gall bladder , on increasing , spreads even to the lymph node of stomach then this is also not possible that it be cut and removed from body via surgery .
Cancer spreading to the lymph node means that the chances of the patient recovering fully becomes 0 % .
Why do lymph nodes enlarge in stomach ?
Ordinarily lymph nodes are found in the stomach of all individuals but when they increase inside the stomach then there are many reasons behind their enlargement .
These lymph nodes of stomach enlarge due to T . . disease also .
Their own cancer in lymph nodes which is called Lymphoma , because of that also they can enlarge .
Other than lymph node one more cancer is also there which is called Hodgkin 's disease , or in some other part of body if cancer is occurring then lymph nodes enlarge in the stomach .
Cancer of stomach and cancer of gall bladder mostly spread in the lymph nodes of stomach only .
If in the gall bladder there is some ordinary common defect then it is removed out of the body .
Patient can lead a normal life but if cancer is in its first stage .
If cancer on increasing reaches the lymph nodes then it is a late stage of cancer , and in this attempts can also be made to save the patient .
Cancer is surely a horrible disease , but if detected in time then this disease can be cured too .
Therefore after 30 years , 35 years and 40 years of age every person should certainly get a medical examination of all his body parts done once .
After that every 4 . years one should get consistently examined .
In men mostly there is cancer of lungs .
Hence x-ray of chest should be done every year after 35 - 40 years of age .
In men secondly , cancer of mouth is main .
For this first of all while standing in front of the mirror yourself , look inside your mouth whether there is a white spot , mixed red and white spot or any blister which is not healing by medicines .
Daily , also , surely clean your mouth .
Keep away from consumption of paan-gutkha and other intoxicating things .
If jaundice has happened to some patient then the chances of liver cancer happening to him increase .
In men of 60 years of age cancer of prostrate is also found .
Cancer of prostrate is that which increases gradually .
So that cancer does not occur in any part of body , regular medical examination of body is definitely the foremost , also with it abstain from ghee , oil , fats and much sugar in meals .
Use fibrous food material , fresh green leafy vegetables and fruits .
Take vitamin A . . . .
Eat Indian gooseberry , lemon and every seasonal fruit .
Do not do intake of much cold or hot .
Do not consume betel nut , tobacco , gutkha , khaini , etc. .
Consume pure fresh vegetarian food and water .
Drink a lot of water and do not use much chillies and spices .
Do a regular exercise with a balanced dose .
Main symptoms of cancer .
Retaining a continuous high fever , unaccountably losing weight , lessening of appetite , lacking concentration and difficulty in swallowing , etc. .
Occurrence of change in daily habits of urination and excretion .
Occurrence of constipation or diarrhoea .
No healing of wounds and ulcers or white freckles inside mouth , occurrence of leukoplakia .
Repeated cough or roughness in throat , sensation of a change in voice and having difficulty in breathing .
In breasts of women or any other part of body formation of cysts or occurrence of a hardness .
Occurrence of attack of paralysis in any part of body , sudden lessening of vision , or seeing double , vomiting and retaining a constant headache , hair loss happening on its own , etc can also be symptoms of cancer .
As soon as these symptoms are evident the person should get a medical examination done of himself by an expert .
Citroen  successful treatment for arthritis  .
Just as there is increase in age people start getting bothered by pain of joints .
Even after a lot of cure it is difficult to get riddance from pain .
But now by techniques available in technology of surgery it is possible to get riddance from disease of arthritis .
Now without surgery it is possible to gain control over it with Saitron therapy .
Because of bio electronic tissue cartilage of knees can be developed again .
The biggest thing is that in arthritis patient does not get a feeling of any kind of difficulty .
Actually what is arthritis ?
In arthritis joints such type of painful swelling occurs that even changes the built of joints .
As such in layman 's tongue arthritis is considered a disease of old age .
But in many patients arthritis can also originate in the age of 20 or 30 years .
People of 45 or 50 years are now falling in more number in the grip of arthritis .
Today about 10 crore Indians are suffering from osteo-arthritis .
Osteo-arthritis , is a very ordinary kind of arthritis which is also the chief reason behind the increase of disease .
Such young people whose weight is more , they have more chances of getting osteo-arthritis with increasing age .
Because of more weight the problem of ailment in joints increases , which gives encouragement to arthritis .
No matter what kind of arthritis patient is suffering from he becomes unsuccessful in his daily activities like cycling , walking around , playing golf , traveling , etc. .
Every 2 out of 3 women in 65 years of age suffer from arthritis whereas only half men out of 65 year old men get afflicted by it .
Arthritis can start in the form of an ordinary pain but in absence of examination and therapy at the right time it can also become an ailment .
There are more chances of disease of arthritis originating in fat people .
In arthritis effect is felt on knees and hip joints where the very first impact of pain and injury is seen .
The patients of joint pain should keep a control on their weight because more weight increases their pain .
Ordinarily many kinds of false conceptions are prevalent about arthritis .
Because people do not have complete information about arthritis they believe every ache in bones or muscles to be arthritis but actually it is not so .
Actually the pain felt in joints or inflammation is called arthritis .
By arthritis not just the joints of body but many parts of body are also affected .
By arthritis impact is seen on various joints of body .
As such arthritis are of many types .
Especially 4 kinds of arthritis are seen : rheumatoid arthritis , osteo arthritis , gouty arthritis , juvenile arthritis .
According to Arthritis Foundation about 1 crore 60 lakh American citizens are suffering from this disease .
According to Arthritis Foundation , out of about 1 crore 60 lakh American citizens , as compared to men thrice the number of women are patients .
Mostly there is this impression in people that in Arthritis there is pain only in the joints .
In rheumatoid arthritis that happens because of reduction in the disease resisting capacity of body , the complete physiological system is affected other than joints .
The disease rheumatoid arthritis is affecting people in the age of 25 to 35 years .
In which main symptoms , pain in small joints of hands and legs , weakness and curvature , weakness in muscles , fever , depression appear .
Other than this defect of kidneys and liver can also happen .
Osteo-arthritis of all arthritis is the disease that is found most of all . It affects people above 40 years of age , especially women .
Osteo-arthritis disease commonly affects all weight bearing joints of knees .
Along with the increase in disease the curvature in legs and the distance between knees starts increasing .
There is pain in climbing up and down the stairs and walking too far , patient starts walking with a limp .
Along with the decrease in temperature there is an increase in the acuteness of symptoms of patient afflicted with arthritis .
To escape arthritis patient starts consuming pain preventive medicines in a large amount .
Varieties of ointment , oil , etc are applied but there is no benefit .
Winter season for people afflicted with joint pain becomes a subject of anxiety .
Why does arthritis happen ?
There is a fluid and flexible tissue inside the cartilage by which there is control in the joints and because of which there is reduction in friction .
There is a shock absorber in the end of the tip of bone , by which friction is possible .
When because of chemical change appropriate control does not happen in cartilage , then there is condition of osteo-arthritis .
Due to infection in joints because of chemical change inside the cartilage osteo arthritis happens .
Osteo-arthritis happens when there is much friction of bones with each other .
The main causes of osteo-arthritis are .
With offset of age a change starts coming in the natural make of the cartilage .
Due to concussion in the joints there is damage .
During sports , jogging , tennis and skiing there is more activity .
Heaviness of body , much increase in weight .
Deficiency of estrogen and vitamin D during menopause .
With newest technique , bioelectronic tissue , cartilage of joints can be developed again .
To escape from pain of joints this is the easiest and safest cure .
Interstitial Cystitis is an agonizing disease for women .
It is seen that women are afflicted with bladder condition for a long time which is called Interstitial Cystitis .
Interstitial Cystitis is also known by the name of painful bladder syndrome .
Diagnosis is very tough in some diseases .
Interstitial Cystitis is one of them .
There was a time when people were told the reason behind ceaseless pain happening in their pelvic region to be imaginary or depression related .
But after investigation , this problem has been spotted in the nature of I . .
In cases related to I . . the thing which therapists find most challenging is this - ignorance of the reasons behind the disease and absence of a characteristic diagnostic test .
The disease of Interstitial Cystitis is often misdiagnosed with urinary tract infection .
If I . . is not diagnosed and appropriate treatment is not done then in women definitely symptoms of reduction in work efficiency , irregularity in sleep , reluctance towards familial care and gross disinclination towards normal familial social life are displayed .
In the context of I . . the most important thing is that there is a cure of this disease .
Through appropriate information & advice patients can find relief from the pains of I . .
Three common symptoms found in women afflicted with I . . or P . . . are .
Bladder pain , feeling of inconvenience and heaviness : Besides bladder pain this pain can also happen in the other parts of pelvis region , for instance lower abdomen and below hip bones .
This pain can come and go and be felt in a chronic way .
This pain can be very much when bladder is full and there is decrease in pain when urination is done .
There is an urgency for urination .
The cause behind I . . disease is still unknown .
Some researchers have recently found out a factor , anti proliferative factor  APF  .
which is only found in urine of women during I . .
The thing that needs to be noted is that for effect to take place in the therapy related to this disease , it takes time and for this it is a necessity for the patient to have endurance .
Today there is no diagnosis for I . .
But there are some such remedies by which there can be a rectification in its symptoms in a miraculous way .
How to stay healthy .
According to WHO also the absence of disease itself is not a sign of being healthy , rather that condition of physical , mental and social excellence by which a human may lead an advantageous and social usefulness , that is health .
Presented are some solutions .
To keep hair healthy massage in the hair roots and do not use too much shampoo .
To keep eyes healthy work in appropriate light only .
Get a regular check up done and do not watch TV from close .
Soak your eyes in cold water .
Clean nose on a regular basis .
For the cleaning of ear do not use matchstick or car keys rather use a bud of good quality .
Cut nails on a regular basis .
To keep skin healthy , do not use modern beauty products blindly .
To keep teeth healthy brush twice , in the morning and at night before sleeping .
Once in a week or a month get a massage done .
Exercise regularly with a tension-free , stress-free , happy mind .
To stay healthy , important is a healthy education , prevention is better than cure .
Morning walk is the best but between dinner and sleeping keep a gap of at least 2 hours .
Pumping up your chest by taking deep breaths increases strength of lungs .
After dinner surely walk for 2 kilometres .
Have balanced and of green vegetables , fruits and milk-containing meals .
To escape waist pain sit in the right posture .
Women during pregnancy , do not smoke so that children being reproduced are not born weak and afflicted with congenital diseases .
Eat a little lesser than hunger by which there is no indigestion .
Do not curb the urge of motions otherwise you can become a chronic patient of constipation .
Knees are a very important part of body those which are done damage to by jumping ropes , walking on uneven roads , high heel shoes .
Most damage is caused by obesity because much weight has to be borne by knees , hence , keep a balanced weight .
If working with eyes continuously then close your eyes and rest sometimes .
Stretch and keep a swathe of cold water on eyes .
Patients of diabetes on doing regular blood related exercise can escape from diabetes .
Abstain from fast food , junk food , preserved food , cold drinks , especially children .
Legs are very important parts of our body which can be mostly ignored .
Take appropriate care of legs .
Do not let your feet get chapped .
Legs take our body here and there , in this they do a lot of hard work , hence to bring them relief do a massage .
Keeping them in cold water , soak legs .
On getting any disease get a regular check up done , carelessness gives chance to serious consequences .
To escape from diseases of modern times like diabetes , obesity , blood pressure , heart attack consume fibrous food , fruits , sprouted grains , milk .
Get vaccinations done on a regular basis to children .
If job is of continuously sitting then warm up by getting up in between .
Stretch and there will not be fatigue .
To escape from AIDS and sex related diseases avoid unprotected sexual intercourse and use a condom .
Treasure of health .
Everyday keep your body , to exercise as much as possible , in front of new challenges .
If there comes a turn to use an alternative from elevator or stairs then use stairs instead of elevator .
Walk with your dog , walk bare feet , meaning do all that by which good work of your body parts is done .
By doing this not only will you be able to keep yourself healthy but you can also keep yourself stress free .
Decrease much fat .
Say goodbye to deep fried food , burgers and other fatty meat  like pork , bacon , ham , salami , ribs , sausages  .
Bring in use low fat products of dairy products like cheese , cottage cheese , milk and cream .
Use nuts and sandwich meat , mayonnaise , margarine , butter and sauce in less amount .
Bring to use the low fat produce of butter , fat free cheese and mayonnaise .
Do not smoke .
It had been verified in 1960 that smoking is harmful for health .
More conscious towards health , the Americans have even started bringing reduction in products of smoking in their everyday life .
By smoking there surely is a decline in age along with it dangerous diseases like lung cancer also happen .
To bring a drop in smoking , on feeling its urge consume fennel seeds , etc. .
Reduce stress in your life .
Stress does trespass into our life in many ways .
According to specialists to reduce stress positive thoughts prove to be very helpful .
To reduce stress spend at least 30 minutes everyday doing that activity from doing which you get a lot of pleasure .
Anger plays the most important role to bring stress .
On feeling anger down count till 10 to calm yourself .
Stay away from those people who are responsible in increasing your stress .
Save yourself from pollution .
If it is not possible for you to stay away from smoke-filled environment then you can at least create a smoke free environment in your house .
Escape from high traffic areas .
If possible do not live in houses made by the roadsides .
Do not choose crowded places for exercise .
Exercise outside your house only then when pollution is less .
Plant trees near and around your house so that there is decrease in amount of pollution .
Sleep is very important for our body , mind and emotional health .
A good sleep maintains in you liveliness and fitness hence a good sleep is extremely important .
If you do not feel sleepy or you have the complaint of not getting enough sleep then it is important for you to know which factors improve good sleep and which bring hindrance to it .
Some of these are like these .
Environment : sharp light , environment full of noise and loose mattresses can become a cause of disturbance in your sleep .
Diseases : Some diseases like arthritis , diabetes , acidity and some medicines are also included which can affect your sleep .
Stress : On various affairs in life worries and thought of sleep can also produce sleep related problems .
Consequences of decline in sleep : decline in sleep can also affect your health , your efficiency and your safety .
Those people who can not sleep properly are not able to focus their attention properly . Their productivity and quality of work becomes less .
In sleep deprivation fatigue makes you irritable which can become a cause of stress and tension in relationships .
Solutions for good sleep .
Fix a time for sleeping and waking up and maintain it .
Escape from afternoon siesta .
Before sleeping avoid drinking tea , coffee and liqueur .
Exercise everyday for 20 to 30 minutes .
Bathing with warm water , reading something or listening to soft music can be helpful .
Make your room of sleeping comfortable , peaceful and while sleeping keep darkness .
Do not lie in bed until a very long time .
Protection of heart .
No matter what , heart should be kept safely because heart is the most important part of body .
As long as heart beats go on our breaths go on .
Heart of human is of four chambers meaning ` left-right auricles ' and ` left-right ventricles ' .
Between auricles and ventricles special ` valves ' have been made which in reality do the work of gatekeeper .
The valve of the left side is called ` mitral ' and valve of right side is called ` tricuspid ' .
From these blood can go from auricle to ventricle only and can not come back up because by then they are closed .
This way at the meeting point of ventricles and main blood-carriers also these valves of the shape of half moon give permission to blood to circulate in the whole body through the medium of the main blood-carriers .
Blood is not able to return back into the heart because by that time these valves shut .
After all what is the necessity of blood circulation every moment ?
Medical literature says that by complete blood circulation 1200 cc Oxygen is received by every cell that is successful in giving only 5 minutes of life to them , hence it is necessary for blood circulation to get activated again .
The blood carriers that take pure blood to all cells are called arteries .
Veins ' is name of those blood-carriers that collect blood from all over the body and do the job of returning it back to the heart .
Hence there is no exaggeration of this condition that our heart is greater and more efficient than any human made instrument .
Obesity ' is the announcement for commencement of heart disease .
When the amount of cholesterol is more In blood , blood clot gets stuck in the heart artery and stops blood circulation .
As a consequence of fatty accumulation on all four sides of blood carriers heart rate increases and the results are fatal .
The only reason behind heart diseases increasing in youngsters is more smoking .
Getting a disease by ` uncontrolled diabetes ' and high blood pressure is 100 % possible .
Heart disease is also hereditary meaning disease that is received in inheritance .
Our heart is a store of such boundless energy whose aim is to keep body in a ceaselessly transient state .
Heart has with it a strong scheme for its maintenance and repair .
On getting a heart attack an acute pain starts in the very center of the chest which starting from the chest takes into its grip , arm , shoulder , neck and jaws .
As a result such desperation occurs that difficulty in breathing is produced and body gets swathed in sweat .
If it is a very acute attack person may faint too .
Acute pain of back can also be a symptom of heart attack which is between both shoulders and below neck .
Symptoms of this type are produced a few minutes , few hours , few days or few weeks before .
Disease producing heart disease in children is ` rheumatic heart disease ' .
Fever occurring on getting a sore throat damages heart and its valves forever .
Pain in joints , increase in weight , slight fever , persistently phlegmatic throat , lessening appetite , bleeding from nose , etc . are its main source of identification .
Local anemia often traps rich , intellectual and people above 40 years of age .
In main blood carriers due to accumulation of fatty substances , they become narrow or stiff .
Due to which the heart has to put in more pressure for blood circulation because the pathway of blood circulation becomes narrow .
Congenital heart disease is one such grotesque state which is a disease as well as a bane .
For its prevention mothers during pregnancy should consider it beneficial to avoid diseases like measles and strong toxic medicines .
Through surgery many babies have received a new life .
Pulmonary heart disease ' is a disease due to some infection in the chest .
Pulmonary heart disease ' can stay hidden for a long time .
Because of chronic cough or asthma this disease is produced due to pressure on the heart .
In winters fog , mist , dust , smoke , etc . is helpful in the progress of the ` pulmonary heart disease ' .
According to medical science , heart manufactures abundant energy in its lifetime .
It is better to say ` no ' to smoking .
If high blood pressure , diabetes have you surrounded then it is important to control it immediately through medicine , food intake and exercise .
Controlling obesity immediately is a proof of being a health lover .
By rules like regular exercise , moderation in food intake , etc . this obstacle can also be overcome .
Until possible try to lead a stress free  peaceful , simple  life .
In life due to much pace , sadness , disappointment there is adverse effect on heart .
Habit of physical exercise is the best cure for escape from heart disease .
Early morning walk and evening walk from this point of view are best .
What to do when there is a stroke ?
If there is pill of Nitro-glycerine it should be kept under the tongue by which relief is felt .
If patient is unconscious then loosen the binding of clothes by making the patient lie down and the left chest should be pressed and released respectively .
Left chest is pressed and released respectively 12 to 15 times in a minute and repeat it until the patient regains consciousness .
The aid of cardiopulmonary resuscitation should be given , that is , by putting your mouth in his mouth your breath should be given to the patient .
The scientists today are active in confirming the fact that whether wave of stress and anger makes the danger of abrupt death more serious by making heart and will power weak .
Out of those people who die by stoppage of heart rate most look quite healthy .
Suddenly some factor astounds the heartbeat of their heart forever .
Just a while before this they are absolutely natural .
What is stress urinary incontinence ?
With increasing age the problem of urine coming out unknowingly can not be overlooked just like that .
While finishing daily chores of life , while coughing or sneezing , laughing , while picking up stuff by bending sudden leakage of urine is called S . . . that is , stress urinary incontinence .
The specialists of International Urology Association have to say that an individual 's muscles and connective tissue which are a support of Urethra , do not remain so capable to be able to support the Urethra .
Then automatically the problem of leakage of urine arises .
Other than this when sphincter , that works like a valve , during pressure is not able to stay shut then also urine leaks out in some amount .
In Indian women there are around 2 . crore cases of S . . . that do not come forward due to lack of awareness and hesitation related to the disease .
By International Urology Association such an estimation has been made that 1 out of 3 women at some point in their life has to face S . . .
There is a very bad effect of S . . . on women in a social , mental and emotional way .
Sometimes their condition becomes so bad that they start feeling scared of getting out of house because of this reason .
Due to S . . . fear of constant wetness and the stink arising out of it makes them conscious of the huge inconvenience .
However this disease has been seen most in women of 35 to 60 years of age .
But its not even like it can be considered a problem of increasing age because , due to weakening of pelvis muscles and tissues connected to them on account of pregnancy , labor , continuously picking up heavy things , menopause or obesity , the disease occurs .
The doctors from International Urology are of the opinion that there are many other reasons behind S . . .
Main in which are - pregnancy .
During pregnancy some hormones of body weaken the muscles of pelvis .
Along with this the weight and pressure of womb also falls on those muscles .
The problem of S . . . happens to more than half of women during pregnancy .
During labor : During the birth of child by the tension from nearby muscles they get torn and worn by which the danger of S . . . increases .
Due to obesity : On account of much pressure on stomach near the bladder there is tension and by this danger of S . . . increases .
According to body ratio people with much weight and patients of terminal obesity have more danger of S . . .
After menopause estrogen level decreases and due to this when there is pressure on Urethra chances of S . . . increase .
After menopause weight of women also starts increasing and this becomes the accessorial reason behind occurrence of the disease .
Hysterectomy : Due to surgery of uterus also muscles of pelvis can get injured .
Side effect of medicines . . . . can happen by adverse effect medicines to control blood pressure or anti-depressants and sleeping pills also .
In the options for treatment of S . . . medication and surgery both are included .
In which anti depressant medicines duloxetine or imipramine are to be taken and paseries  use of removable medical apparatus which can be fitted in the vagina  has to be used .
Bladder neck suspension like M . . .  Marshall Marchetti Krantz  and brush suspension have to be made use of , bulking agents like hydrogen injection  periurethral injection  have to be applied , etc .
Other than this use of T . . .  tension free vaginal tape  is also included .
T . . . is a new find by which support can be given to Urethra .
After bringing it in use once woman suffering from S . . . gets a long relief .
In this woman does not have to go through the bother of staying in the hospital for too long .
The best thing is that there is no big surgery for T . . .
Because of this there is also no threat of any scars remaining on stomach .
By a specialist surgeon applied bandage in T . . . tape is affixed .
Excellent material is used in making T . . . tape .
The company that makes T . . . determines its high quality .
The T . . . applied in the treatment of S . . . is successfully brought into use by about 10 lakh women in the whole country .
It takes even less time than 30 minutes in finishing the safe procedure of T . . .
Herpes is an extremely problematic skin disease .
Herpes occurs especially on thighs and scrota , neck , waist and buttocks on body .
The first round boil appears that on turning into rash produce itching .
These rashes later take the form of spots and blemishes in which so much itching occurs that the patient gets distressed .
Treatment : After grinding leaves of marigold first scratch the place of herpes and then apply .
After grinding borax in lemon juice first scratch the place of herpes and then apply .
Herpes gets healed on application of the big harada after grinding .
On application of basil leaves after grinding benefit is seen in herpes .
On application of lemon juice also herpes gets healed .
On application of milk of swallow-wort herpes goes away , by this burning sensation occurs more .
Boils and rashes can occur in any part of body .
In summers often boils and rashes erupt on the body .
Hence you should mostly do the consumption of cool and cold food products .
Anoint the boils and rashes after grinding the bark of neem .
Tie the leaves of Indian ginseng after warming on the boils and rashes .
After soaking in ghee , warm the leaf of sacred fig a little then the boil will swell and burst in a few days .
Dysentery , diarrhoea are all diseases related to stomach .
Dysentery occurs by consumption of various products made out of black gram , gram lentils , dairy products , etc . and by consumption of light food products in excess amount .
Those products that contain much ghee and oils or are made by a combination of a lot of spices , dysentery occurs due to them also .
In dysentery the apprehension of having to go to the toilet again and again is always there .
Loose motions do not occur in much frequency , but a greasy substance which is called mucous is mixed in it . Sometimes blood also goes but sometimes blood and mucous come out mixed .
There is convulsion in the stomach and anus , by which patient feels much pain and restlessness is experienced .
Sometimes fever comes in the normal form also .
Nowadays just as growth of this disease is happening , likewise horrible forms of this disease are also coming forward each day .
Swelling of intestines , expansion or contraction of intestines , injury in intestines , diarrhoea , etc . are various diseases the forms of which are terrible .
Because of improper digestion blood is also not manufactured in required amount , by which a person experiences weakness each passing day .
In dysentery there is a direct relation between having meals and going to the toilet .
That is when the patient has his meal , urge to go to the toilet arises . Such a patient has to go to the toilet again after early morning bowel movement action , after having tea and breakfast , etc .
In the faeces , undigested fibbers of protein are found .
This cycle goes on for years and the patient considering himself healthy does not worry about it .
The reason behind it is also that inconspicuously in his health he can not see any difference .
But as and when time goes on , patient starts experiencing many symptoms of weakness in himself .
Due to this gas starts getting made in stomach because of which sometimes restlessness is felt .
Besides this anemia occurs and there is complaint of blisters inside the mouth and taste in the mouth goes bad .
Many times the patient feels that his heart is failing .
In youth patient gets pimples on his face .
During dysentery take about 3 grams of husk of Isabgol with cold water thrice a day .
On being afflicted with dysentery take Indrajau powder in a quantity of about 3 grams with cold water thrice a day .
By taking two ripe bananas and eating their pulp mixed with jaggery , salt or curd dysentery goes away in a few days .
Boil and filter the pulp of a half ripe wood apple .
After pounding and grinding keep long pepper 5 grams , black pepper 5 grams , rock salt 5 grams and bishop 's weed 5 grams .
In the morning after eating 5 grams churna , on top of it drink a decoction of peel of drumsticks .
Soak approximately 25 grams of Indian gooseberry , when soft mix a little salt and grind it and after making pills of about 1 gram each eat 1 pill once in the morning and evening .
By this loose motions occurring due to weakness of abdomen and intestines will stop .
Take kernel of old seed of mango and roasted fennel seeds in equal weights and make it by grinding and filtering .
Eat 6 grams every morning and evening along with water , it is useful in stopping loose motions .
On drinking after grinding and filtering about 11 grams of calabash herb in water loose motions stop .
Small but very useful home remedies .
Home remedies of some diverse diseases are very useful and constructive . They can be used freely .
Home remedies do not bring about any kind of physical or mental damage .
Use them but if disease is serious then surely take advice from a doctor or an expert .
If you feel your eyesight to be weakening then start eating fennel seeds regularly every morning and evening , there will definitely be benefits .
For pain in teeth and molars crush a basil leaf and make round pill of it and press it under your molar or tooth , there will benefit as pain will stop .
By applying a salve of turmeric on a wound on body blood flow stops and wound also gets healed immediately .
For pain in ears warm mustard oil after putting one to two garlic cloves in and put one to two drops in each ear .
In toothache by sucking at a clove and by pressing the place of ache benefit occurs .
If there is complaint of constipation then by taking Isabgol regularly with half a cup of milk there will be riddance from constipation in just a few days .
Ear pain also goes away by juice of onion .
If there are worms in stomach then take one spoonful of onion juice for 8 to 10 days regularly and the worms will be destroyed .
On being hit by heatstroke feeding onion will get benefits .
For heatstroke sharbat of raw mango is very beneficial .
During headache by warming up a betel leaf and placing it on forehead rapid benefit is seen .
To remove diseases like herpes , scabies , abscesses , pimples , itching , etc . chew fresh soft leaves of neem in the morning then relief will be felt in just a few days .
On getting burnt if coconut oil mixed in juice of basil is applied then burning sensation reduces and there is benefit .
In old constipation if honey mixed in juice of paper lemon is taken then constipation gets removed .
On there being blisters , by sucking at sugar and a piece of catechu keeping together in the mouth blisters heal soon .
Marks of small pox lighten up by applying coconut oil regularly .
On there being bleeding from nose , by splattering a few drops of cold water bleeding stops .
On mixing alum in cold water and by putting a couple of drops in the nose bleeding stops .
If nose has become rough and dry then by applying ghee on a finger and turning it around inside your nose benefit is seen .
On running of nose , after roasting ginger and by eating it with jaggery benefit is seen .
After roasting ginger and by eating it with jaggery sneezes also stop coming .
When not feeling hungry , by eating garlic or onion soaked in vinegar , indigestion goes away .
For wind in stomach make a powder by grinding rock salt with bishop 's weed and if eaten morning and evening then wind in stomach gets completely removed .
On there being acute flu , by making a tea decoction of ginger , black pepper , turmeric and salt and giving to drink , much benefit is seen .
During constipation by eating 10 grams of gulkand at night for 4 to 5 days relief is felt .
During constipation by eating triphala  powder made out of Amalaki , Bibhitaki and Haritaki in equal parts  powder morning and evening benefit is seen .
During dysentery by taking clove powder with honey relief is felt .
In cold biles applying ground chraunzi in milk is very beneficial .
If there are black spots under the eyes then by applying almond oil after mixing honey in it there is benefit .
During disease of hiccups by smelling asafoetida after warming it up also there is benefit .
After a scorpion bite on applying asafoetida by rubbing it in with milk soon relief is felt .
On the wound becoming septic apply asafoetida after grinding with neem leaf .
During an attack of hysteria by smelling asafoetida relief is felt , along with it feed some asafoetida with jaggery or candy .
During high fever , by rubbing asafoetida after grinding it with water fever gets reduced .
In leucorrhoea mixing the powder of half a tola cumin seeds and powder of half a tola sugar candy in the wash of rice and consuming for 21 days is very beneficial .
During cough consume powder of 1 gram dried ginger and 1 gram cumin seed mixed with honey morning and evening .
During pain in molar by pressing roasted asafoetida under the molar pain becomes less .
In disease of nose if powder of half a teaspoon of asafoetida with 1 cup curd is taken for 3-4 days then the disease of nose goes away .
During nausea take tamarind sherbet or make a powder after burning skin of tamarind , then consume it with 1 cup of water .
Intoxication of liqueur , cannabis , etc . goes away after giving tamarind water to drink .
To remove mucous accumulated in the chest keep warm poultice of flaxseeds on the chest .
On the burnt spot , take equal amount of oil of flax seeds and distilled water of lime mix it and apply on a clean cloth tie it on the burnt spot , burning sensation and wound will heal .
To remove cough , you get relief by eating a ripe bael .
If there is pain in throat eat pulp of bael .
In loose motions due to mucous , after cooking bael eat it with a mixture of jaggery or candy .
In dysentery much benefit is seen by consuming 100 grams buttermilk after mixing 100 grams honey in it .
In whooping cough licking 5 to 10 ratti alum water twice or thrice a day with honey begets rest .
In indigestion by consuming a pinch asafoetida with water benefit is seen .
In disease of diabetes you should drink milk after mixing powder of turmeric .
During swelling by applying liquorice root warming it after grinding it in water swelling goes away .
During sore throat relief is felt by sucking at a piece of liquorice root and sugar .
During cough boil milk with 4-5 black peppers in it and drink it , you will feel relief .
For irregularity in menstruation consume 1 gram powder of black pepper mixed in 1 teaspoon honey for 15-20 days morning and evening .
In headache by applying dried ginger after grinding it in milk headache goes away .
When lips get chapped by eating , relief is seen , 3-4 almonds .
When lips get chapped melt wax and rub it on lips or apply glycerine .
During teething rub glycerine on the gums of children , by this there will be no uneasiness .
In stomach ache of children grind asafoetida in water and apply its ointment on navel .
During insomnia there is benefit by eating onion raw or in excess with vegetables .
In a state of impotency after taking and mixing 10 grams of onion juice . grams of ginger water . grams of pure honey and 4 grams of pure ghee consume it for 20 days .
Take this mixture at night or morning and evening at both times , astonishing benefits will be seen .
To increase digestive power by eating ginger mixed with nigella seeds and salt also gives benefit .
In phlegmatic cough if 2 teaspoons honey , boiled in a half teaspoon glycerine mixed with lemon juice is consumed there is benefit .
By applying honey on a burnt place relief is felt , and blisters do not occur .
During insomnia consume honey mixed in juice of onion .
If children wet the bed then by giving 1 teaspoon honey mixed in same amount of water there is benefit .
During backache make a powder of equal parts of poppy seeds and sugar and consume it morning and evening in small amounts .
During pain in eyes mix 5 grams of alum after grinding fine with 200 grams of rose water and put 2-3 drops of it in your eyes 3-4 times a day .
During itching by applying pure brimstone mixed in coconut oil itching gets healed .
On a wound or injury apply coconut after grinding it fine and mixing turmeric in it .
During cholera to stop vomiting , by giving coconut water many times a day in small amounts vomits stops .
When there is chapped skin due to cold by massaging with coconut oil at night there is benefit .
On getting burnt with fire you should apply pure coconut oil .
To remove lethargy drink warm water squeezing lemon in it .
For chapped hands and legs make a mixture of lemon , glycerine and rose water and massage everyday at night .
During itching apply lemon juice and basil after grinding .
For headache drink half a lemon after squeezing it in a glass of water .
During constipation suck at a lemon applying salt on it or drink the juice .
If a baby vomits milk then make him lick at juice of lemon mixed with honey .
During fever of malaria if black pepper and salt mixed in lemon juice is given 2-3 times a day then benefit is seen .
In kidney stones if lemon juice and rock salt mixed together is taken regularly morning and evening then stones come out .
When there is a poisonous insect bite poison gets removed with decrease in pain by rubbing lemon juice on that spot .
To remove odour of sweat by applying juice of lemon in armpits there is benefit .
To remove toxin of opium give sugar mixed in 50 grams of lemon juice to drink .
In disease of pyria by applying everyday 22 grams of lemon juice , 110 grams of sesame oil and a little rock salt mixed together disease gets destroyed .
To stop hair fall cut a lemon and massage it on your head .
To destroy lice in head massage lemon juice mixing sugar in it .
To destroy lice and its eggs apply neem oil in head .
For infectious diseases by spreading smoke of neem leaves in the rooms germs get destroyed .
To make teeth healthy and strong brush your teeth with a neem stick everyday .
If there is a complaint of the liver and spleen there is benefit by consuming papaya regularly .
During stomach ache consume asafoetida and rock salt after mixing juice of onion .
In respiratory disease juice of onion is very advantageous .
Swelling and pain recedes by applying juice of onion on a honey bee bite .
By washing hair with buttermilk they become dense and shiny .
To bring softness to your skin massage with buttermilk on your body .
On leprosy or white marks by applying henna after grinding there is a change in the color of skin .
In Ascites by consuming juice of leaves of radish there is benefit .
Apply juice of garlic on the swelling of body .
In disease of old cough eat 2-3 cloves of garlic everyday after roasting it in the morning and evening , by this blood increases .
In fatigue of body if legs are kept soaked till the ankles in a pot of warm water after mixing salt or drops of vinegar in it then fatigue will be gone .
Monsoon depression is produced due to the effect of weather .
Because there is more dampness in the monsoon season , body is always sort of sticky , on top of that there is less electricity as well , by which the melatonin hormone is produced less in body , which gives rise to depression .
Because of monsoon depression we do not like anything .
During monsoon we do not even feel like doing our favorite things .
Due to monsoon depression temper flies at everything and irritability is felt .
Due to monsoon depression we feel sort of tired .
Because of monsoon depression lack of confidence is felt .
Because of monsoon depression less hunger is felt .
Because of monsoon depression sometimes a human may take steps of suicide .
The chief reasons behind monsoon depression are .
Monsoon depression is genetic to an extent , but now research is going on its causes .
It used to be said before that monsoon depression occurs more in women but recently in a report issued this has come forward that it is same in women and men .
Treatment of monsoon depression can be done by anti-depression meditation .
Specialists also treat it with artificial light .
By the use of this light melatonin hormone is produced in brain , which works for anti-depression .
In this weather only consume fresh fruits and vegetables .
Do not eat outside food at all .
Definitely include salad in meals .
Increase the intake of sugar and carbohydrates in meals .
By this there is decrease in depression .
Cures to escape from depression .
Pay attention to health .
Special attention to food intake .
Definitely do regular exercise .
Everyday in the morning and evening take a walk of half and hour each .
Make nuclear life a bit social , because social like works as therapy .
Diseases occurring during rainy season .
Main symptoms of jaundice .
In jaundice substance named bilirubin becomes more than normal .
As a consequence of which in the gaps of skin , nails , urine and mouth yellowness is seen .
Bilirubin named colored substance is made in our body absolutely everyday .
The root source of generation of bilirubin are red molecules of blood .
The life of red molecules of blood has been considered as about 120 days .
They get destroyed after 120 days .
On getting destroyed substance named bilirubin is born out of them .
Bilirubin keeps going round in our body through the course of blood .
Through the course of blood bilirubin reaches our liver .
In the liver a bit of bilirubin gets destroyed and some part through the bile juice after reaching small intestine gets mixed with faeces and gives faeces its own color .
This is the very reason that the colors of faeces are various .
If there comes an obstruction in the bile duct that makes bilirubin reach the intestine from the liver then this substance does not reach the intestine .
As a result color of faeces becomes white .
Faeces becoming white is considered the main symptom of jaundice .
In this way some amount of bilirubin while coming out through urine makes urine like itself .
All these are normal processes , which happen in our body absolutely everyday .
As a result of defect in liver the cycle of bilirubin gets disturbed .
Consequently , the amount of bilirubin in blood increases , which gets accumulated in body parts like eyes , skin and nails etc . This way these body parts start looking yellow and weakness in body increases .
Give the skin of 1 yellow Haritaki in water to the patient of jaundice .
Soak approximately 22 grams of henna leaves in water at night .
If given to drink after filtering it in the morning jaundice itself will go away .
Keep glassful of juice of sweet seedless or sweet kandhari pomegranate in an iron pot on the roof at night .
Wake up in the morning and mix sugar in it .
If it is drunk for 15 days jaundice goes away completely .
Without peeling , apply wet lime on a banana , let it stay in dew all night .
In the morning eat it after peeling .
If it is done everyday then within 1 to 3 weeks jaundice will go away .
Squeeze a piece of bitter gourd inside your nose after chafing it in water , after use of a few days yellowness of eyes will keep going away .
If about 100 grams wheat is put in a pot then oil-like fluid of wheat gets stuck in the tablespoon .
If this fluid is applied with the finger in the eyes of the patient like kohl then jaundice will go away .
Keep half kg of onions of the shape of emblic myrobalan after cutting squares in them , and soaking them in vinegar , and putting some salt and back pepper on it on top .
Everyday in the morning and evening after taking out one feed it to the patient , jaundice will go away .
After pounding leaves of radish , squeeze out about 110 grams of their juice and keep it on fire .
When boiled take it off fire , after filtering and mixing about 22 grams of sugar in it give it to patient to drink .
Along with it cook and eat radish and its leaves , it is useful in jaundice .
Put 10 drops of raw papaya on a batasha , after eating for 10-15 days jaundice will go away .
Cholera can be a life threatening disease .
Symptoms of cholera : The outburst of cholera is mostly in the days of summer .
Cholera is a disease that occurs suddenly .
Patient does not get a pre-warning of cholera , though in some patients 4-5 days before cholera complaint of dysentery is found .
When disease appears fully patient starts getting violent loose motions and vomiting starts .
This order of dysentery and loose motions can happen many times in a day .
Because of going to the toilet again and again patient can faint .
Mainly three conditions of cholera are considered .
State of relief : In this condition specially there are complaints of dysentery and loose motions .
This condition stays for about 10-12 hours and the patient starts vomiting at a very acute speed .
After this dysentery starts .
Complaint of ache and cramp in stomach starts .
After excreting for 2-4 times the color of faeces becomes white like the color of water of cooked rice .
Extreme pain starts in hands and legs and the pulse rate becomes acute .
Coldness : This stays from a few hours to a few days .
In this state the patient goes cold and faints .
Patient looks inert like a dead person .
Skin goes white .
Temperature of body increases .
In this state dysentery stops but vomits keep coming .
Amount of urine lessens or stops completely .
There is no lessening of the stomach cramp .
The pulse rate can not be felt it gets very slow .
Condition of relapse : In this condition the patient becomes extremely weak .
Normally he can not even move his body .
There is loss in weight of body and pulse rate becomes acute .
Because of obstruction in the intestines stomach may bulge .
The color of urine becomes muddy and its amount lessens .
Blood pressure becomes lesser than normal .
In this condition vomit and dysentery stop , but a specific kind of odour starts coming from the patient 's breath and if the patient is not treated he dies .
If the patient of cholera is drained with excess of vomiting and loose motions then give him to eat half whit of opium mixed in 1 whit of lime  lime , which is eaten mixed in betel leaf  loose motions will stop immediately and the patient will feel sleepy .
Loose motions stop by giving lemon seed , juice after grinding rose in it .
Peel the skin off after cleaning the mud after having uprooted rot of swallow-wort and after mixing black pepper in equal amount and pounding it in the juice of ginger make pills the size of grams .
Give the patient 1 pill , after two hours each .
After heating cardamom and mint in water and then cooling it , make the patient drink it sip by sip .
When someone in the house gets cholera keep him in a room separate from the rest of the healthy people in the house , keep his eating utensils also separate .
After caring for the patient and after having touched his clothes or utensils wash your hands with hot water and soap .
The patient 's vomit and loose motions should be buried after putting in a pit .
When the patient recovers you should get his room repainted .
The bed and clothes of the patient should be washed in water with detergent or they should be burnt .
This way it is necessary to pay special attention to the cleanliness of the patient .
Symptoms of disease of itching .
Itching is a bacterial disease .
Bacteria of itching are minute but like lice .
These bacteria lay eggs hiding in the pores , and coming out at night they bite the skin here and there and produce itching .
These bacteria become innumerable through reproduction and transfer from one person to the other .
Thus this disease spreads very fast and spreads its trap over home-family , neighborhood , and village-colonies .
Often these bacteria do not affect body parts above the neck , that is , face , ears , head , etc . get saved .
Another thing is that bacteria hide in the space between the fingers and bite and produce itchy rashes there .
Besides this there may be itching in the palm .
When patient scratches with nails due to itching skin breaks and bacterial infection occurs there .
Because of this infection can emerge in the skin here and there .
Itching is a contagious disease , it gets transmitted from one person to another .
Itching occurs by being together and collective usage of clothing .
This is the very reason that once when this disease comes home then almost all members of the house get affected by it .
For treatment of itching it is necessary to bathe in a proper way with a neem soap before applying medicine .
In the evening bathe again properly .
Bathe for two days in this way .
Usage of medicine for itching can be done 3 days later .
During itching apply pure brimstone after grinding it in mustard oil .
During itching these germs get destroyed by the brimstone .
In 6 grams of Sodium bicarbonate squeeze the juice of half a paper lemon .
Mix about 16 to 22 ml of mustard oil and massage all over body .
Bathe after sitting in the sun for 2 hours .
It is beneficial for dry itching .
While bathing apply all over your body cow dung mixed in a little salt and lemon .
If its winter season keep sitting in the sun .
Bathe after 10 to 15 minutes .
An equal part of cow urine mixed in hot water should be kept ready , it would prove beneficial to bathe in this .
Taking 250 ml of mustard oil after putting in a pot cook on fire and burn 21 leaves of swallow-wort putting in one by one .
When all leaves have burnt to ashes take it off fire .
Mix a little Mansil in it after making it fine .
After massaging for 2 to 3 days itching will keep going .
On drinking 22 grams of seeds of Mexican prickly poppy after grinding and filtering in water benefit is seen in itching .
On application of lemon juice and jasmine oil both mixed in equal amounts itching will keep going .
After massaging with the pure oil of tarah also itching gets healed .
After grinding poppy seeds in about 22 ml water and after mixing lemon juice in it massage it all over your body .
This medicine is very beneficial for dry itching .
Cures for prevention of swine flu .
For the prevention of swine flu always wash hands in water for at least 15 to 20 seconds especially after sneezing or coughing on your hands definitely wash your hands .
What is called swine flu ?
Swine flu is a kind of a new disease which shows symptoms like those of common cold , cough and fever , but which can sometimes also be fatal .
How to prevent swine flu .
Until now there is no medicine for swine flu .
If you are getting a sneeze or cough then cover your nose and mouth with your palm .
If you have swine flu , then you should stay inside your house for at least 7 days , until even one symptom of swine flu is be seen in you .
So that you are not able to spread this disease to others .
Pay attention to the information given by the health department or the instructions given by the official .
Ask everyone in the house especially children to wash their hands again and again with soap and water .
What more should people of health department do ?
Stay away from the front of the mouth of a patient mouth so that he is not able to sneeze or cough on you .
When should you go to the doctor immediately ?
Although for common flu you can rest at home itself .
You should drink as much water as possible during swine flu .
If there are any of the following symptoms in children then you should go to the doctor immediately .
There is difficulty in breathing .
Going blue .
Drinking water in less amount .
Occurrence of too much vomiting .
Faint coming over .
Much irritability , and dislike for everything .
Extremely high fever or severe cough .
If the elderly have any of the following symptoms , then you should take them to the doctor immediately .
There is difficulty in breathing .
Pain or heaviness in chest or stomach .
Suddenly dizziness coming over .
Feeling restlessness and nervousness .
Occurrence of too much vomiting .
What are the medicines for swine flu ?
In most people treatment of this disease is possible by medicine of common cold and fever .
Some medicines are given in the serious disease of the virus of swine flu , like Zanamivir or Oseltamivir .
These medicines are not available everywhere .
How long does swine flu virus stay alive on anything ?
Virus of swine flu can be on any thing by the touch of the patient .
This virus can stay alive on these things for about 2 to 8 hours .
During this period , if a certain person after touching that thing , without washing his hands touches his nose , mouth or eyes then he can get swine flu .
Examples of such a thing are desk , handle of door , keyboard of computer , pen , toy , wall of bathroom and kitchen , on shelf and tap .
How can we kill the virus of swine flu ?
Virus of swine flu is over sensitive .
Any cleaning agent in which chlorine , iodine , soap or alcohol is present can finish off this virus .
Other than this , this virus can be finished off in a temperature of 75 to 100 degrees .
How should a patient of swine flu wash clothes or utensils ?
Clothes and bedcovers , etc . of patient should be washed in hot water with soap .
Their clothes should be kept away from other clothes of other people before washing .
Eating utensils should be washed separately with soap water properly .
The person cleaning should immediately wash his hands properly with soap water .
Immediately after surgery get physiotherapy done .
Knee is the biggest and the most complex joint of the body .
Four bones are involved in this joint .
Along with this 15 muscles , 13 cartilages , many ligaments and meniscus , etc . are also related to this joint .
The following reasons can be the causes of pain in knee .
Injury occurring in the knee , applying too much pressure on the knee , sitting or standing in the same position for a long time can be the causes of pain in knees .
Increase in bones and weakening of muscles , being over 40 years of age by which bones often get worn or get weak are the main reasons of pain in knees .
While exercising or in the gym exercising in the absence of the instructors , without knowing your weight , level of food intake , age , cause of pain , physical structure doing yoga or other exercises by watching television or by watching another person become the cause of pain in knees .
Synovial fluid coming out of the knees , not getting physiotherapy done after surgery , occurrence of autoimmune diseases  like rheumatoid arthritis  , wearing shoes of wrong measurement , size and shape and high heels , sudden neglect of exercise by normal people or athletes , obesity , etc . are also causes of pain .
According to the point of view of medical sciences knee is a weak synovial joint .
The layers  tibular and fibular condyles , patella and femoral condyle  that make this joint are thin .
Whereas this joint bears the weight of whole body .
Hence the following points can be the main causes of pain in this joint .
Pain in the interior  medial  part of the knee , pain in the exterior  lateral  part of the knee , pain on top of the bearing  patella  , pain behind  popliteal fossa  the knee , pain in iliotibial band , pain in ligament , pain in gay rope or aneucerine cartilages , pain in meniscus , etc. .
Hence there should not be pain in the knees , for this it is important to pay attention to the following points .
Keep your weight appropriate , according to your age , height and physical structure .
For this you should do special exercise included in privative physiotherapy .
After standing for 1 to 1 . hours knees on an average continuously you give knees rest of 5-10 minutes .
When there is no pain in the knees then you should not use toilets with commodes .
Slippers , shoes of the right shape and size only should be made use of .
In the gym exercise should be done and weight should be lifted always under the instructions of informed specialists and efficient physiotherapists .
It is beneficial to do the exercise  isotonic , isometric exercise , retrograde quadriceps , etc .  of knees on a regular basis .
In meals you should take diet replete with calcium and necessary elements .
When knee pains it is advisable to take advice from physiotherapy specialists .
If there is wear and tear in the bones , there is some infection or there is a tumor then it should be treated through an orthopaedic surgeon .
Find excuse to laugh .
If sometimes there is tension then an ultimate comedy movie would be of much use .
Research and doctors all have to say that laughter is the best solution for getting rid of tension .
Blood pressure and hypertension are reduced by laughter .
A good alternative for heart related exercise is laughter .
Laughter reduces the secretion of the hormone increasing tension .
Laughter increases the disease immune capacity .
By removing the polluted air from lungs laughter helps in making them healthy .
Laughter reduces stiffness of muscles .
Common diseases caused by tension .
There is a direct relation between tension and diseases .
Medical research has already even proved it many years ago .
Out of all the cases coming to the doctor everyday 40 to 80 percent is caused by tension .
Disease of heart , extreme fatigue , spells of excitement , repeated mood swings , state of restlessness , abject depression , less sleep , high blood pressure etc are the common problems of tension .
Decrease of appetite , peptic ulcer , loss of immunity capacity of the body , extreme pain anywhere , continuous cold and flu also are the common problems of tension .
Headache and migraine , asthma or breathlessness , tumor , thyroid problem , obesity or fatness , these are also the common problems of tension .
Some ways to remove tension are as follows .
In order to remove tension not only some exercise must be done regularly but some time must be given to yoga and meditation .
Deep breathing or the practice of taking the breath gradually and deeply and then releasing it with the same speed comes of much use in becoming stable .
Solving the reason of tension also removes the tension .
For becoming tension free discussion may be done with any counsellor , but money is spent in that .
Sharing with any unbiased , intelligent and experienced person helps in relieving from tension .
For some days the daily routine should be changed and seen .
Going out to roam is also a good solution to reduce tension .
At least spend every Sunday according to your own happiness .
Take good sleep every day to reduce tension .
There is ayurvedic treatment also for tension .
Senior ayurvedic doctor Hansraj Bhutani says that if one has to stay away from tension then renounce desire , anger , greed , attachment .
Do not take stress if you have to stay tension free .
The person is healthy if the seven metals , energy and excrement work by staying in equal state otherwise tension can occur .
Ayurveda is related to food habits .
Therefore have nutritious and easily digestible food .
Eat food timely .
Do not consume things made of white flour , fast food , cola etc .
Eat a chapatti less at night so that the stomach stays light .
Drink warm milk five hours after supper .
Drinking warm milk five hours after supper is good medicine for sleep .
Be cautious that you do not consume red chilli .
Do not consume non seasonal vegetables .
Drink water kept in earthen pots .
When your body and mind are healthy then you will introspect but you will not get tense .
Diet has a direct impact on the mind of the person .
The choice of good diet reduces our tension along with giving us nutrition .
If the diet is good then the tension would stay less but if there is even slight problem in the food then it may increase the disease .
Diet has a deep relation with tension .
If we stay in tension then either we eat more or else we stop eating altogether .
If eaten more then it can spoil health but if not eaten at all then the condition of weakness , anxiety can occur due to lack of nutritious substances in body which can increase tension even more .
What should be eaten during tension ?
During tension , body and mind both get tired therefore body has need for abundant food for nutritious substances .
At the time of tension the quantity of vitamin , mineral , vitamin B complex , zinc , serenium should be increased .
The consumption of green leafy vegetables , sprouted lentil - gram , fruits , milk , juice etc is beneficial .
For getting VitaminC use raspberry , oranges , tomatoes etc .
What should not be eaten during tension ?
We take more quantity of tea , coffee , cold drink or oily food to reduce tension which do stimulate us but their excessive consumption reduces the quantity of vitamin B complex .
Fruit , juice or lemonade help in reducing stress .
It is not wise to invite diseases by showing irregularity in diet .
If you want that you should be healthy not only by body but also by mind then paying special attention to diet is important for this .
Then tension would not come near you .
By taking good care of face , face looks young even in increasing age .
After a certain age it is natural for wrinkles to appear on face , you want or you do not want they do come .
After all what are these wrinkles ?
Can these wrinkles be stopped ?
Do polluted atmosphere , cigarette smoke , lack of nutrition in diet , tension etc . increase tension ?
Dr . Minocha of Batra Hospital has to say that ' actually our skin has three layers - epidermis , dermis and subcutaneous . .
The outermost layer which is visible to us , it is called epidermis .
The middle layer is called dermis and the innermost layer is called epidermis .
Dermis has flexibility and the protein and moisture in it helps in preventing wrinkles .
With advancement in age the flexibility and moisture in dermis starts reducing by which the layer becomes thin and is not able to send moisture to the outer layer .
The result of which are wrinkles .
According to beauty expert Arti Sharma , after the age of 30 years women should be cautions towards wrinkles .
If from beginning some things are kept in mind then for many years wrinkles can be averted .
In order to stay protected against wrinkles do not stay in direct light of sun for very long .
Especially the ultra violet rays of the sun from 10 o ' clock in the morning till evening become the biggest cause of wrinkles .
While going out in sun , swimming or in the field of sports , make use of sun - protection cream .
Abstain from smoking .
Smoking absorbs the precious moisture of skin because of which wrinkles form before time .
Daily massage your skin with hydrating cream or moisturiser especially when the air is dry .
By applying excessive cream on face the pores get closed because of which the sweat does not come out profusely and becomes the reason for prickly heat and wrinkles .
If yoga is done then one can stay safe from wrinkles for quite long time .
If with other precautions you practice yoga then till 55 years of age the wrinkles will not appear .
Keep in mind that for oily , dry , fine , sensitive skins etc the lotions are also of different types .
Use lotion only after taking advice from the specialist .
It is believed that the immune capacity of women is more than men but this is also true that they invite many diseases on their own by showing carelessness to their own selves .
We will give you the information regarding some such diseases whose victims these women become by becoming careless in the diet and life style .
Due to osteoporosis the bones become weak and start breaking gradually by becoming brittle .
Osteoporosis is a disease which occurs because of deficiency of calcium and Vitamin D .
Maximum women come to know about this when there is any fracture in their bones and the bones do not join easily .
Generally the women of advanced age get affected more by osteoporosis , the level of estrogen decreases because of menopause .
Apart from this , not doing physical labor after menopause and the deficiency of Vitamin d and calcium in diet are the chief causes of osteoporosis .
If you suspect osteoporosis then get X - ray done immediately .
For the test of X-ray the use of technique named dexa is used .
By the technique named dexa status of fracture in bone at present is found out .
In order to escape from osteoporosis after menopause increase the quantity of calcium in your diet and exercise regularly .
Thyroid is that gland of the body which controls the physical activities .
Because of hyper activity of thyroid gland the quantity of thyroid hormone starts increasing .
If thyroid gland is hypoactive then the quantity of thyroid hormone is less than required .
Both these conditions are signals of the thyroid disease .
Generally the women are affected with hyper thyroid .
The detection of thyroid is very easy .
India was the first country in which the national program for blindness prevention was started in 1970 after detecting the comprehensiveness of the deficiency of Vitamin A .
Short term and long term solutions have been included in this national program .
The plan for long term solutions have been made for making Vitamin A rich food materials abundant and to encourage their food .
On the other hand in order to prevent blindness and to avoid the other ill effects of deficiency of Vitamin A the heavy dose of Vitamin A to children from 6 months to 5 years is a short term solution .
National nutrition Organisation , Hyderabad reviewed this national program in 1978 .
In order to achieve the desired result from the program it has been found that it is important to make the related health workers and those running the program more aware together with the immense cooperation of people of the community .
The department of health and family welfare formed a task force in 1989 to prepare the principles to rectify the execution of the Vitamin A program and to clarify the ways of the work .
Under this effort a booklet has been prepared for the health workers and those who are running the program .
In the program of national prevention of disease against the blindness occurring due to deficiency of Vitamin A it is important to make the working staff of program more aware together with immense cooperation of the people of the community .
The problem of the deficiency of Vitamin A .
In the developing countries the deficiency of Vitamin A has been identified as a chief problem occurring due to the deficiency of nutrition and control over it can be achieved .
The role of Vitamin A in the prevention of blindness due to lack of nutrition is very well known .
According to a vague estimation the eye sight of around 30 - 40 thousand children may be lost due to deficiency of Vitamin A .
By getting Vitamin A in huge quantity blindness occurring due to lack of nutrition can be prevented .
Vitamin A has a very huge hand in correcting the health of children and reducing their mortality rate .
Till now there is no clear knowledge as to how Vitamin A does such vital works .
It has been noticed in Indonesia that the children in whom there is deficiency of Vitamin A , in them the danger of onset of dysentery and the grave type of infection related to respiration increases by 2 to 3 times .
Death of around 50 percent children in India is due to dysentery and the diseases related to respiratory diseases .
Because of measles the quantity of accumulated Vitamin A in the body decreases .
Because of the heavy fall in quantity of Vitamin A the danger of chances of other diseases increase .
These diseases are pneumonia , onset of dysentery and dry eye discharge  xerophthalmia  .
Every year thousands of children die due to measles and other complications occurring because of it .
Apart from this the cornea of the eye is damaged due to this and the child may also become blind .
The deficiency of Vitamin A - why and how ?
The deficiency of Vitamin A gives rise to xerophthalmia that is , the disease of dry eye discharge  the drying up of eye  .
In xerophthalmia the outermost layer of the pupil , that is , conjunctiva and after that the layer below the conjunctiva , cornea , dries up .
Due to the damage of cornea after this the eye sight is lost .
When the accumulated Vitamin A in body finishes and the quantity of Vitamin A received by body through daily food is less than required then xerophthalmia occurs .
Xerophthalmia occurs due to these reasons .
Xerophthalmia occurs due to the reduced consumption of less food rich in Vitamin A everyday .
Xerophthalmia occurs due to the error in transmission of the absorbed retinol to the right place in the body and the fast depletion of the accumulated Vitamin in the body .
The deficiency of food materials rich in Vitamin , the reduction of the quantity of Vitamin A accumulated in the body are the chief causes of xerophthalmia .
The absorption of Vitamin A in the children victims of dysentery , respiration related infections , measles , diseases of stomach and intestines decreases and its need to the body increases .
As a result of this a cabal of infections starts .
Because of the deficiency of Vitamin a the power of the body to fight with the infections is reduced .
Due to infection the health of the child goes on deteriorating .
Eye related signals and symptoms .
Although the deficiency of Vitamin A affects many organs but its worst effect is seen on the eyes because of which eye sight is constantly lost .
The surface of the cornea becomes dry and rough which later on ruptures partially or completely .
Wound develops because of this in the cornea .
The damage to eyes is such due to the wound in the cornea that it is permanent , that is , it can never become alright .
The eye sight goes by this .
Eye related symptoms are the most trustworthy measure to identify the deficiency of Vitamin A .
In the serious condition of disease the grave symptoms may become visible early .
It is not essential that mild symptoms before order and grave symptoms later on are visible .
The detection of the signs and symptoms of xerophthalmia .
Night blindness : the first symptom of xerophthalmia .
In night blindness the child can not see after darkness or things kept near him in the room .
Bitata stains - although there could be difference in the shape , place and design of the bitata stains but they are similar in appearance .
Bitata stains are formed due to the accumulation of frothy substance on conjunctiva .
If disease of keratomalacia is not treated then cornea at the place of wound may get permanently damaged .
Due to keratomalacia a hole may occur in the cornea .
In the condition of hole in cornea the damage would never be corrected .
The sooner the treatment of keratomalacia is done the smaller would be the wound and the damage of cornea .
If the treatment is done fast then the damage of the cornea and the blindness occurring due to it can be completely prevented .
India was the first country which had implemented a national level program to prevent blindness occurring in children of less than 5 years due to the deficiency of Vitamin A .
In order to prevent blindness occurring due to deficiency of Vitamin A . national disease prevention program was started in 1970 .
Initially the prevention program was started in those seven states where the problem was more serious .
By 1975 the disease prevention program was implemented in the entire country in the form of a national program .
At present the national disease prevention program is being run amidst 3 crore children less than 5 years of age .
The help of two principles is being taken in implementation of the national disease prevention program .
In the short term principle heavy dose of Vitamin A is given time to time to children less than 5 years of age .
The danger of blindness due to the deficiency of Vitamin A is the maximum in the children less than five years of age .
At first the age of pre school children  1 to 5 years  was included in this program .
Now by giving an extension to this program children of 6 - 11 months are also being included .
Together with this there is the proposal to give priority to children from 6 months to 3 years .
Giving extra dose of Vitamin A in addition from time to time is effective and safe .
On giving the dose of Vitamin A in limited quantity its ill effects are negligible .
At times the effects of headache and vomiting are seen but they are seldom and common .
The prevention of blindness occurring due to deficiency of Vitamin A .
The decided dose of Vitamin A is as follows .
Children of 6-11 months : giving the dose 1,00,000 I . .
The time of the inoculation of measles is a good time to give the dose of Vitamin A .
Children of 1-5 years : The dose of 2,00,000 IU every 6 months .
The treatment of children affected with the deficiency of Vitamin A .
On the identification of deficiency of Vitamin A all children affected with this must be immediately given the dose of 2,00,000 IU of Vitamin A .
One to four weeks after this second dose of 2,00,000 I . . of Vitamin A should be given .
In order to avoid the occurrence of the deficiency of Vitamin A again the regular intake of Vitamin A rich food items like green leafy vegetables and fruits and vegetables of yellow pulp should be encouraged .
Children who are suffering from dysentery , intense respiratory infection , an eye must be kept carefully on them .
Such children must be administered the normal dose of Vitamin A .
For the national program the solution of Vitamin A comes in the form of a fragrant syrup in bottle of 100 millilitre .
The quantity of Vitamin A in syrup is 1,00,000 I . . per millilitre .
With each bottle there is also a spoon of 2 ml measurement with it .
By consuming the syrup by filling up to the mark on spoon the determined quantity of 2,00,000 IU of Vitamin A is obtained .
In order to keep Vitamin A there is no need of any special type of arrangement like the cold series .
Then also Vitamin A should be kept in dark and cold room protected from sunlight .
After opening the bottle all its solution must be used within 6 . weeks .
On not opening the bottle , the solution of Vitamin A in the bottle stays safe when kept in dark and cold place for around one year .
The cost of 100ml of the bottle of the syrup is around rupees 25 . 00 or the cost of one dose of 2,00,000 IU of Vitamin A is around 50 paise .
The solution of Vitamin A is given free to the community through the medium of primary health center .
Apart from this , capsule of the determined dose of Vitamin A  1,00,000 IU  comes for the infant kids as well .
By cutting one end of the capsule with scissors or clean blade all the content filled in it must be squeezed in the mouth of the infant baby .
Vitamin A syrup is obtained from the ministry of health and family welfare .
On the basis of the probable number of the beneficiaries  the children from 6 months to 5 years of age  the medical officer of the primary health center should put a demand for the required quantity of Vitamin A .
The maternal and child health department of health and family welfare department is that central department which has the complete responsibility of the implementation of program .
The program is implemented by the primary health center and sub center in the rural areas under the guidance of medical officers .
The medical officer of the primary health center is in charge of getting Vitamin A , administering dose of Vitamin A to children and guiding the program .
The responsibility of administering dose to children in primary health centres is on assistant health nurses  ANM  and on other paramedical workers .
Comprehensive immunity  inoculation  program provides an opportunity of coming in contact with the newborn babies .
The contact happening with the newborn babies of 9 - 12 months for the inoculation of measles is the best time for giving the first dose of Vitamin A  1,00,000 IU  .
Intensive Children Development Service  ICDS  program provides opportunity to give Vitamin A to children of 6 months to 5 years of age .
Not only should Aanganbari workers help in identifying needy children but they should also help in administering Vitamin A dose and health education to areas where ICDS program is running .
By his fifth birthday the child should get nine doses of Vitamin A in total .
In order to keep track of the Vitamin A dose being given to the children of less than two years the mother-child security card should be brought into use .
Under the ICDS program vigilance is kept on all the children of up to 6 years so that the use of their growth vigilance card is behavioural .
Lack of Vitamin A in food and lack of accumulated Vitamin A in the body are chief reasons of xerophthalmia .
In children of pre - school age lack of Vitamin A and carotene  the initial form of Vitamin A  in the daily diet is the chief reason of tension .
The amount of Vitamin A and carotene in the diet of children have been found less than half of the daily proposed quantity of 400 gram retinol or 1600 microgram of beta - carotene .
The absorption of Vitamin A decreases in children suffering from dysentery , breathing infections , stomach related diseases , measles and other diseases .
In the lack and prevention of Vitamin A help may be got in the control and prevention of malnutrition through immunity , proper nutrition , oral rehydration and timely treatment .
The last resort in the prevention of the lack of Vitamin A is the regular consumption of Food items rich with Vitamin A .
The food items rich with Vitamin A Are cheap as well as locally available .
The getting of Vitamin A should be ascertained right from the time of birth .
Along with the feeding of colostrum or milk  the milk that is secreted from the mother ' s breast immediately after the birth of child  the need of Vitamin A would be fulfilled during the first six months of breast feeding of the child .
Between the age of four to six months initiating giving abundantly Vitamin A rich food is very essential .
The food items included in this are green leafy vegetables and fruits and vegetables consisting of yellow pulp  carrot , Capsicum , gourd , papaya , mango and sweet potato  .
The quantity of Vitamin A received from 100 grams of edible part in maximum green leafy vegetables is more than the daily received dose of Vitamin A prescribed for the diet of Indian children .
After cooking this much of vegetable is reduced to only two tablespoonful .
Along with the other food items a child can eat this much of vegetable easily .
This way he can easily fulfil his daily need of Vitamin A .
The inclusion of other food items rich in Vitamin A apart from green leafy vegetables like dairy products  milk , cheese , curd , butter  liver , eggs , ghee and oil should also be encouraged .
Such habits related to diet put a stop on the lack of Vitamin A .
The consumption of green leafy vegetables and other food items rich with vitamin A everyday during pregnancy and breast feeding is advised .
Because of the state of Vitamin A in the body of the mother the quantity of Vitamin A in the mother ' s milk and by that the health of the child is affected .
Because of the consumption of food materials rich in vitamin A in abundant quantity during pregnancy and breast feeding there is never a lack of Vitamin A in both mother and child .
Nutrition education is an integral part of primary health services and ICDS program and under this emphasis must be given on the encouragement of the use of food items highly rich in Vitamin A .
The ultimate solution to the problem is implicit in providing education of eating food items rich in Vitamin A to people .
The consumption of regular and sufficient quantity of Vitamin A in the children of preschool age and pregnant and breast feeding women should be ascertained .
The implementation of the national program in effective manner .
The program can be implemented effectively only with the help of trained workers and the rise of community awareness of high level .
The training must be given to the entire team providing health services and the workers of ICDS program .
The workers of both the areas will be benefitted by this in playing their responsibility in the implementation of the program in effective manner .
The following matters must be paid attention to while training .
The effect of the deficiency of Vitamin A. .
The recording of the signs and symptoms of the lack of Vitamin A .
The identification of people receiving dose of Vitamin A .
Along with getting Vitamin A the treatment of lack and stopping of Vitamin A by giving heavy dose of Vitamin A .
The reduction and stopping of the lack of Vitamin A by encouraging the consumption of food items rich in Vitamin A available at local level . The effective methods of special message and communication .
The encouragement of community participation .
The technique of recording and the method of reporting .
The lack of Vitamin A is the chief health problem of the mass among the children of preschool age in India .
According to a rough estimate 30 to 40 thousand children become victims of preventable blindness every year .
The danger of infections in children increases because of lack of Vitamin A and the chances of their falling sick and dying also possibly increases .
The benefit received from Vitamin A complex makes the national disease prevention program stop the blindness occurring due to lack of Vitamin A very widely effective .
The officers of health and ICDS program and the controllers of these programs can play the role effective support in saving the eye sight of crores of children and improving their life .
Under the National Disease Prevention Programme implemented against the blindness happening due to the lack of Vitamin A 3 crore children below the age of five years are being benefitted at this time .
Under this program two chief principles are being adopted .
One is short term principle and the second is log term principle .
Under the first principle the arrangement of administering heavy dose to children between the age of 6 months and 5 years has been done .
Under the second plan emphasis is given on getting more vitamin through the medium of vitamin A rich food materials like green leafy vegetables , yellow vegetables and fruits , regular consumption of dairy products and breastfeeding .
Encouragement is given on consumption more quantity of vitamin A rich food materials  which are cheap and which are also available regionally  and on educating the children because this is the last solution to stop the deficiency of Vitamin A .
The mobile phones of hospital staff become home of diseases .
The mobile phones which are becoming the integral part of the modern life style may become the reason for the spreading of disease .
This fact has come forward in the study of the mobile phones of the workers of MGM hospital situated in Washi here .
More than 82 percent workers of hospitals are found to be the careers of microbes and organisms of contagious diseases in a study .
The doubt of the occurrence of skin disease , food poisoning , pimples , toxic shock syndrome and other diseases are in this .
According to the study done by the Indian Medical Research Council the test of 120 mobile phones of the workers were done .
The researcher final year student of MBBS of MGM medical college Dr . Nikhil Tambe has found that such organisms and microbes have been found on 99 phones , which along with making the disease of the patient serious may also become the reason of delay in his getting well .
Tambe has said that the maximum number of presence of microbes has been found in phones of the technicians .
After this the mobile phones of ward , nurse and then doctor were infected .
The chief of the microbiology department of the hospital Dr . Chitra said that the maximum 54 . percent stacillococcus acurus organisms have been found on the mobiles , which become the reason of skin disease .
Apart from this the organisms like e - coli and pseudomonas have also been found because of whose infection the ill effect on the body is maximum .
In one of the studies done in Coimbatore the presence of 96 . percent organisms was found on the phone of the hospital workers .
Sprouted cauliflower may protect from the cancer of stomach .
This fact has come up from one of the studies that by eating germinated cauliflower three days early keeps you miles away from stomach cancer , gastritis and ulcer .
Sprouted cauliflower destroys the microbes which give rise to these diseases .
According to the published study in the General Prevention Research of the American Association for Cancer Research situated in America by eating 70 gram quantity of germinated cauliflower regularly three days before finishes the effect of the organism named helicobacter pylori  H . pylori  .
H . pylori microbe is the maximum reason of the diseases related to stomach and the cancer of stomach .
Jade Fahe , the research associate of the faculty of the department of medicine science of the John Hopkins School of Medicine has said that it has been found from the study that with germinated cauliflower not only in animals but in man also it is capable of stopping cancer .
According to the study , the researchers selected a few from the 48 Japanese suffering from the helicobacter microbes and they were fed 70 grams of sprouted cauliflower for eight weeks and some were fed sprouted Alfa .
In the beginning of the study on these people the effect of these organisms was studied after four to eight weeks following it through various tests .
After eight weeks it was found less , however the effect of the microbes on the ones feeding on Alfa was fond to be the same .
New oral vaccine has been prepared for diarrhoea .
The National Institute of Disease , NICD Kolkata did test on 70 thousand people .
The cost of the dose of oral vaccine would be 40 - 50 rupees .
To prevent diarrhoea the chances of the oral vaccine to come early to the market has increased manifold .
The National Institute of Intric Disease has completed the successful test on around 70 thousand people .
70 percent cases have come positive in the test .
Although around one year of time may be required for the oral vaccine to come in the market .
The cost of the dose of the medicine may be between 40 to 50 rupees .
Not only in India but diarrhoea has become a serious problem also of the whole world .
Despite this there was no vaccine for the treatment of diarrhoea .
But after the untiring efforts of hundreds of researchers success has been achieved in the preparation of one more vaccine .
International Vaccine Institute Korea has manufactured this medicine .
To escape from the Indian market a national company has bought this formula .
The cost of this medicine would be one dollar per dose and any person would have to take two doses of it .
The effect of medicine will stay for two years .
In Vietnam the dose of vaccine has already been given to 90 lakh people and in Kolkata , India the trial has been done on 70 thousand people , in which the accuracy of the medicine has been found to be 70 percent .
In the program specialists from World Health Organisation , National Institute of Cholera and Intrinsic Disease Kolkata , ICMR , Department of Biotechnology of the Central Government and International Vaccine Institute Korea .
The experts have told that the first to prevent diarrhoea is oral vaccine .
Its maximum benefit would be in Orissa , West Bengal along with the people living in other coastal regions of the country and on international level Africa , Australia and people residing in the coastal areas in other countries , because the number of cases registered here is maximum .
Though this medicine can not be administered to children who are less than one year of age .
According to the figures of World Health Organisation the total number of case registered for cholera was one lac 77 thousand in the whole world and 4 thousand 31 people died because of this .
Because of unavailability of any vaccine to prevent this disease one has to depend only on the methods of precautions .
According to the World Health Organisation the effect of diarrhoea is seen more in coastal areas like Orissa , West Bengal , Gujarat and metropolitans like Delhi and Mumbai .
How can the diagnosis and treatment of cancer be done ?
Many times due to less information or carelessness the diagnosis of breast cancer is done late .
If you stay a little attentive then the treatment of breast cancer is possible timely .
Be cautious towards your body and get investigated by the doctor from time to time then riddance from breast cancer can be obtained easily .
If tumor is felt in breasts together with growth in the arm pits then be cautious .
Mild pain and swelling is felt on that place because of the growth of tumor .
Change comes in the breasts or their size .
At times wound appears on the place of swelling and then blood secretion starts from there .
When the tumor is on the upper and outer surface of the breast and there is secretion from the breast then immediately contact the doctor in such situation .
The tumor appears hard and there is no pain in it on touching .
The women who are more than thirty years of age should certainly themselves inspect their breasts once monthly seven days after the menstruation .
The stages of breast cancer are believed to be four .
But as the spreading of the wound increases its treatment becomes difficult .
In the fourth stage also if its treatment is done then success is achieved in 50 percent cases .
In the first and second stage the treatment is cent percent possible .
In the first stage the size of the tumor is less than two centimetres .
The tumor of two centimetres is not visible in any part of theory .
In the second stage the tumor grows to two to five centimetres big .
This reaches to the neighbouring gland of colourless fluid .
In the third stage the tumor grows to five cm and spreads to the skin and muscles of the body but does not reach up to the neighbouring gland .
In the fourth and very dangerous stage the tumor can be of any size .
The tumors do get affected by this and it also spreads to the other parts of the body .
As first surgery is done on the area with pain and then it is diagnosed that how big is the spread .
The conclusion may be wrong at the clinical stage but at the surgical stage the condition becomes very clear .
After the age of forty years the women should certainly get the mammography done .
In one mammography the expenditure comes to one thousand rupees .
Do not hesitate at all in getting mammography done .
Discuss about this , tell this to the members of the family and accumulate new information .
The treatment of breast cancer is expensive , which comes to one lac rupees .
But many charitable institutes are such which help immensely in this to the person .
Many help line services are also available for the treatment of breast cancer .
the treatment of cancer depends upon the age of the patient , the shape and spreading of the tumor formed in the breast .
Maximum women have to undergo surgery following which they are advised for anti cancer drug or hormone therapy .
Some women are advised for radiotherapy after the surgery so that the cancer is eliminated from the roots .
After the age of forty get mammogram done regularly or else do the inspection of your breast yourself after consulting the doctor .
If there is any type of tumor in the breast then immediately contact the doctor .
All the tumors are not cancerous but showing precaution is important .
If there is discharge of blood from the breast then immediately show to the doctor .
In the grown situation of the cancer the breast has to be removed partially or completely .
At present in place of the severed breast fake breast can be implanted through surgery .
The creation of breast is done with the tissues of the muscles of the patients only .
Since breast cancer is also dependent on the quantity of hormone in the blood , therefore the chances of cancer decreases on removing the uterus .
Whoever has got breast cancer once should not conceive in future , because by this there is a chance of breast cancer to start again .
In order to be safe from breast cancer it is important to bring change in ones food habits and physical and mental behavior as well .
Get your breasts checked up once in a month .
The benefit of this is that if you are suspicious then in the first stage only you will get to know about that and you will be saved from the danger forever .
Start the test seven days after the menstruation .
Toothache should not take away sleep .
The health of your entire body and beauty is connected with the health of teeth .
The aching of teeth is actually such pain which if happens to anybody then his sleep at night and the peace of daytime is lost .
If you want to escape from toothache then do not show even a slight carelessness in the care of teeth .
Although everyone know this that teeth are the very important part of the human body but still it has been seen that there are less than 20 % of the people who get the regular checkups of their teeth done .
65 percent of the children in our country don not get any type of dental care .
The effort should be this that cleaning teeth should be included in the habit of the child and later on it should not have any difficulty .
When the teeth of the children start coming out then it is required to keep special eye on them and to keep more information about teeth .
Often it has been seen that in this phase the children suck their thumb a bit more .
Actually they get relief by sucking their thumb .
If this habit of sucking thumb does not get over even by the age of four-five years then the case becomes serious .
The thumb starts weakening and it also has bad effect on the teeth as well .
In such case many times to give correct shape to the teeth many times the braces are needed .
It should not be such that in order to stop the thumb you give nipple to the child that also the honey one .
This will be even worse with him .
When the children of 12 to 18 months start walking then they also fall down several times .
Due to the falling of the children they also have to become victims of the injuries .
To whatever extent it is possible , save the children from falling .
In mild injuries the need to visit the doctor does not arise .
If the gums of the children get injured badly then you must take it to the dentist .
How should be the food of the children ?
The children should be given such snacks , in which there is no excessive sugar and they are non sticky .
The parts of sticky food items like lollypop , toffee etc get stuck to the gums and teeth of the children .
At this time everyone ignores this in laugh that the children do eat all these things and there is no effect , but later on this is included in their habit , whose maximum fine is borne by their teeth .
The mouth of children is filled by innumerable bacteria .
Whenever the children eat sweets , these bacteria also feed on them and in return release acid .
On an average the teeth start coming out in the age of six months .
During the six months when the teeth start becoming visible , clean them with wet clean clothes .
On becoming two years old start his brushing .
DO not give paste to the children before the age of seven years , because their teeth need fluoride after seven years only .
Yes , if you have to give the temptation of paste then put negligible paste on the toothbrush .
No matter how much the child protests , certainly clean his teeth .
If the bacteria start getting accumulated in teeth then getting rid of them would become difficult .
The biggest reason of the falling of teeth are these bacteria .
Due to the reason of bacteria the teeth of children fall rapidly in comparison to the elders .
To the children give the brush of their choice .
By doing such the children will show interest in brushing .
Try that the children should do the brushing with their own hands .
By cleaning your teeth you show to them that in what manner they should do the brushing .
You will be surprised to know that every year the teeth of thousands of children fall untimely , the chief reason of which is milk and the products made from milk .
Not wiping their mouth , not rinsing their mouth after making them eat something may become a lesson of problem for them in future .
Many mother-father feed milk to children when they are sleeping and the bottle stays stuck to their lips for hours , which in no way is a good situation .
This milk provides nutrition for long to the bacteria whose result are the cavities .
Later on what could be the situation of the teeth of these children , this can easily be imagined .
Give good toothpaste to the children .
Give only those toothpastes to children which are specially created by keeping their age in mind .
The brush should also be of good quality and its bristles should also be soft .
Save the children from any type of injury .
The teeth of children are extremely weak and there is also a big danger of their breaking on falling .
Take utmost care of baby teeth especially .
Often mother-father have the belief that the baby teeth have to go , even if they break untimely then also there is no effect , while this is not so .
These teeth give good look to the face and also give support to the gums and the teeth which would come out later on .
The new coming teeth take their place in the right manner , but if these teeth break untimely then the teeth which come out later on do not get good shape .
Keep the emergency number of the dentist written in the mobile and diary , no one knows when its need arises .
If the tooth gets broken suddenly on getting hit then go to the doctor immediately .
If the treatment of this broken tooth is done in an hour then the chances of its getting fixed again increases .
Otherwise many times the situation can be such that the tooth does not grow out again .
Fake tooth may be required to be put in future .
If the teeth of the children are paining in eating or drinking something then also take it to the doctor .
If the toothache is not treated in time then its ill effects can be on the nearby teeth and gums .
The dentist does its root canal by which the teeth are saved .
The part of teeth which is empty , the dentist does its crowning .
Through the intra-oral camera the dentist makes the patient familiar with all the activities inside his mouth .
This magnifies the mouth by 35 times and all the scenes within start moving in front of the eyes like a film .
The fiber optical headlight instrument which pierces the darkness of the mouth make she eyes of the dentist reach the inner parts mouth and gums .
Again then no disease stays hidden from him .
You must have often seen that doctors put something like spectacles on their eyes .
Actually this is the surgical telescope , by which the minute things of teeth and gums can be seen .
To investigate the mouth minutely digital x-ray proves to be of very high use .
These new digital x - ray machines consist of 50 to 90 percent less radiation in comparison to the old x-ray machines .
The best thing of digital x-ray is that by this the a very big image comes in front of the patient only that the dentist can discuss with him about every part of the mouth .
Zoom is type of whitening system which is safe , effective and absolutely fast as well .
In zoom procedure your teeth will become absolutely white and shiny in just an hour , while previously it used to happen such that the patient had to visit the doctor for several days .
Zoom is a very simple and painless procedure .
First it separates the lips and the gums then a whitening gel is released in between .
Five minutes after the fluoride treatment the process stops .
The whiteness of the teeth after this is unbelievable .
If you regularly take care of the teeth at home , then it will give you company for the entire lifetime .
To maintain the whiteness of the teeth is no difficult task .
You have to do only this that you should regularly consume asafoetida and strawberry .
Today an interesting thing has come into vogue , it is this that in order to save the patient from the boredom after sitting in the dental chair , music systems of various types have been put in several dental clinics .
The patient puts earphones and gets drowned in good music , then what does he care , the treatment of teeth goes on and he stays carefree .
If the treatment of teeth is not done on time then many diseases can surround you , you can even get cancer .
The infection of gums can also be lethal at times .
Because of rotten gums tonsil , infection in the bones and the entire body due to the transmission of blood can be negatively affected .
That is , if you are really worried about health then do not show any careless with regards to the care of the teeth .
When should you go to the dentist ?
If you go to the dentist after every six months then the disease can never come anywhere near the teeth .
If your gums are bleeding , the taste of the mouth becomes foul , if there is any disease related to mouth and teeth then certainly remember the dentist .
If you smoke then you must certainly be needing the dentist because smoking has a very bad effect on the gums , they become black and week .
If someone smokes in the house then remind him of the slogan of ` quit smoking ' .
If care lessens has not been shown in the cleanliness of the teeth then there is no need to worry .
The way in which cleanliness is required for each organ of our body , in the same way the teeth also need .
If the teeth give you problem then you entire body will cry out .
Develop the habit of cleanliness in the child from childhood only , so that they stay fit in future .
As much as possible bring in use the brush of soft bristles .
Change your toothbrush in every two-three months .
Because first the torn bristles may harm your teeth and gums and secondly bacteria start growing in them .
If you have cold then it would be good if you change your brush .
Your brush should be small .
Keep the bristles at the angle of 45 degree angle on the teeth .
make the brush move in a circular manner on gums and teeth .
With the help of the brush clean the teeth both inside and outside .
Clean your tongue also at the time of brushing because bacteria are also accumulated on the tongue which produce odour on getting stuck .
Certainly brush twice daily .
One should definitely brush for three minutes but keep in mind that excess pressure should not be exerted on the teeth .
Massage the gums with finger intermittently .
If brushing after breakfast is included in the routine then it would be the icing on the cake and one will also be free for the day .
Keep a wet clean handkerchief close by before feeding milk to the child .
Clean the gums and mouth very softly immediately after feeding milk to the child .
Never let the child go to sleep with the bottle of milk or juice in mouth .
the juice of fruits has natural sugar while the sugar contained in milk is called lactose .
If the lactose is left stuck to the tooth then it will inspire the bacteria to release lethal acid .
If the permanent tooth of the child falls after getting broken .
Pick the tooth and wash it properly with clean water .
Now wet the tooth in a glass of milk .
But one thing you should always keep in mind , do not touch the root of the tooth .
Within six hours get this tooth fixed at its right place .
Get rid of the odour of the mouth .
The mouth can stay healthy only when your teeth and gums stay clean .
In order to remove the odour of the mouth you can also use the mouthwash .
The mouthwash not only kills bacteria but it also removes the odour of the mouth .
If you want you can make the mouthwash at you home .
Keep three quarter cup of dried strawberry or one cup of fresh strawberry in a ceramic bowl and put boiling water in it .
On cooling take the strawberry out after squeezing .
Mix a spoon of lemon juice in it .
Enclose this mouth freshener in an airtight jar and rinse your moth twice a day .
Finely grind the dried peels of oranges .
The powder of the dried peels of orange will make you teeth shine on one hand , it will also remove the odour of the mouth .
If the teeth are not shining then the attraction of the face remains incomplete .
There was a time when the braces of Jassi had become very famous but by God today what can be said about her beauty .
Today the women have become some more beauty conscious .
If the teeth are in bad shape then reduction comes in the beauty of the face , in such case dentists are the ones , who make the face beautiful by giving good shape to the teeth .
Implantologist and orthodontist play the chief role in this .
Implant is the latest technology in India .
Generally before implanting tooth the nearby good teeth are rubbed and then new tooth is fixed .
In the use of the technique named implant there is no need to fiddle with the nearby teeth .
Screw is fitted in the implant affected part and it is left to heal for four to six months .
After this pure titanium tooth is implanted over it which looks very real .
Though implant is a very costly treatment and the cost of one tooth implant comes to 15 to 20 thousand , but despite it , this technique is liked very much today .
This also has two reasons , one they look real and beautiful and second they become your own forever .
Orthodontist is one such specialist which treats various types of distorted teeth with braces .
That is , by bringing right shape to the teeth it makes our face beautiful .
The beauty of white and shining teeth is simply outstanding .
The teeth become yellow when the protein and bacteria get stuck on the teeth after getting mixed .
If it is not removed from the teeth in three-four days then yellowness comes in teeth .
You can also keep your teeth shining with two ways - take the help of baking soda and hydrogen peroxide .
You have to do only this that first wet the toothbrush in hydrogen peroxide and before brushing dip it in baking soda .
Some myths which disturb .
The eyesight becomes weak on the removal of the upper tooth , this myth is totally false .
Removal of tooth has got nothing to do with sight .
When the artificial set of teeth or denture is built for once then it comes to use for the entire lifetime .
But it is not at all like that , the tissues below the denture keep engine with time and the dentures do not fit and such dentures then do not stay hygienic , therefore the dentist advice to change it every five years .
If the treatment of damaged tooth is done once then all the problems of teeth and gums get over , but it is not like that .
Different yes of materials are used to correct the teeth and change comes in this material as well .
If the cleaning of that part is not done well then there stays a suspicion of rottenness within it .
Also the inspection of that corrected tooth once in a year is essential .
There are many types of disbeliefs regarding the health of the teeth .
Are you also not victim of any misbelieve ?
Scaling weakens the teeth , this is also a wrong belief .
Actually the teeth become weak only when the gums and teeth are not cleaned properly .
If the scaling of the teeth is not done regularly then the gums become weak and the teeth start falling after getting rotten .
The procedure for the treatment of teeth is painful , it is not at all like that .
The patient is given local anaesthesia due to which no matter what kind of treatment is done to the teeth there is no feeling of pain .
Very modern high drilling machines also do not vibrate much .
The pregnant women should not get the treatment of the teeth done , this myth is also baseless .
Get the treatment of teeth done as per your wish but yes , it is important that you certainly take the permission of the doctor before surgical treatment .
If the x-ray is not done in the initial three months of pregnancy then it would be good .
The teeth should be massaged with finger and not brush , this is also a false belief .
A brush having good bristles removes the food particles entangled in the teeth properly .
Massaging the gums with finger after cleaning the teeth with brush is beneficial .
It is not good to clean teeth with rice , salt and tobacco powder etc .
While the truth is that in good quality pastes there are such particles which are specially mixed for the teeth .
The loather formed out of paste destroys the bacteria on the teeth while because of these things the upper layer of the teeth becomes bad and the dirt on the teeth is also not removed .
The specialisation of the prosthodontist dentist is in making dentures .
Prosthodontist replaces those teeth which have broken because is some accident , or the weakening of the gums or old age .
In the armentarium of prosthodontist there are several types of dentures whose use he does according to the need .
Pyrrheodontist does the treatment of the gums .
Pyrrheodontist also does the surgery for the creation of gums and the areas near to the teeth .
Adonist has the expertise in root canal .
When the teeth get rotten very deep inside the root , then the adonist does its root .
Adonist fills it after removing the rotten part of the teeth .
Restorative dentist removes the bad tooth and fills the cavities with suitable material .
Paedodontist inspects the teeth of the child completely and then gives various types of instructions to the mother related to the teeth of the child , because of which the teeth stays strong year after year .
Many interesting facts are connected to the teeth .
Teeth is the most hard and strong part of our body .
Daily eat and drink such food , by which the health of the teeth is maintained .
Healthy food and drinks are fast friends of teeth .
there is plenty of calcium in dairy products like milk , cheese and curd , which make the teeth strong and healthy .
If the dairy products are not more , then include those food items in your food in which there is good quantity of calcium .
In between meals do not take much snacks , especially those in which there is more sugar and sourness .
In this plaque develops in the teeth and gradually they come in the condition of failing after getting weakened .
Drink enough water , especially the water of the tap , because it has fluoride , which strengthens the gums .
Take those medicines and syrups which are sugar free .
The health is also maintained only when extremely pure and clean water is available .
Many times despite knowing that the water coming out of the tap is dirty we do not take any measure from our side to clean it .
Many times due to polluted water several types of dangerous diseases surround the person like typhoid , cholera , paratyphoid fever , jaundice , polio disease etc .
The diseases of stagnant water like malaria and dengue are even more dangerous diseases .
The straight thing is that lack of proper management with respect to water is the root of all the diseases .
The chemicals which rich the water naturally are harmful as well and many times there are several such types chemicals which the man sends to the water due to his own foolishness .
Underground water is dangerous for the baby and by the consumption of the polluted water mixed with nitrate they become the victims of blue baby syndrome .
Because of the nitrate the liver and nervous system become weak due to polluted water .
Due to polluted water many types of infections happen in skin as well .
The excess spreading of DDT and many other insecticides in fields and farmlands makes the environment impure and also pollutes the water .
The nervous system weakens due to insecticides .
Due to the weakening of the nervous system cancer may also occur .
The right quantity of fluoride in water makes the teeth and bones strong .
When the quantity of fluoride becomes very high in the water , then its ill effects is seen on the entire body .
The effect of the increased quantity of fluoride is very bad on the spinal cord .
The immune capacity of the child is less in comparison to adults .
Therefore there is more need of care to the child .
With the cooing of the child the atmosphere of the entire household becomes happy , but if the child falls sick , then the entire house becomes tensed .
Nurturing child is not a joke , attention must be kept on him every time .
Every moment an eye must be kept on the development of the child .
Wisdom and attention are very important , then only the child can stay safe from diseases .
Come let us start with the arrival of a newborn baby .
The child is born crying , which is a good symptom .
That is , his brain is functioning properly and the blood transmission is correct .
But after some days when the child suddenly starts crying , then the mother becomes afraid .
He feels whether he has any serious disease , but there is nothing to panic in this .
The reason for his crying can be mild stomach pain , mosquito bite or wet nappy anything .
Some things should be kept far from the child .
Gripe water , glucose , oil bath .
Repeatedly kissing .
In order to make him quiet putting the nipple repeatedly on his mouth .
Speaking loudly near the ears of the child , yawning in front of his mouth etc .
Diarrhoea is a common problem in small kids .
When several types of microbes enter inside the body of small kids then they get diarrhoea .
There should not be a lack of water in the baby , for this keep on feeding it liquid in adequate quantity .
The child should not be the victim of malnutrition for this make him eat food .
Apart from this , make the child drink rice water , thin daal of washed moong , curd , soup etc .
Whenever the child goes to toilet give him liquid to drink .
Mother 's milk is the best diet for the child .
Fully stop the external milk .
If it is required to give external milk then cow milk is the best , but certainly mix equal quantity of water in it .
Give ORS solution to the child without interval .
In home also the solution can be prepared .
Cool the water after boiling and then mix salt as in tears and then some sugar in it .
Before preparing the milk of the child wash your hands properly .
Use bottle and nipple after boiling .
It is better to feed him with spoon and feeding cup than feeding with the bottle .
Every time after motion wash his hands and legs properly .
If eight-ten times water like dysentery happens in the child , there is fever , frequent vomiting and he becomes unable to eat anything , then in such situation take him immediately to the doctor .
Cold is also a common problem and if it is not brought under control in time then pneumonia and tonsil may happen due to that .
The child can get cold due to any reason .
Protect the child from cold .
Apart from this , bathing with very hot water is also dangerous , that also becomes the reason of cold .
Virus also enters in the child by repeatedly kissing him .
If the child gets cold then bring in use some domestic techniques .
Wet the clean cloth of silk in hot water mixed with half spoon of salt .
Then with light hand massage the nose of the child and clean it .
Do not give cough syrup to the children who are less than one year of age as well .
Many times cough syrup may also prove to be dangerous .
The child can even go in the state of unconsciousness for some time .
Do not even ignore the urinary infection of the child .
The urinary infection of the child may prove to be dangerous in future .
You must teach the kids this that whenever they go for toilet etc , they must wash that place very nicely .
Make the child wear clean clothes .
If there is difficulty in micturition , there is burning and swelling on the place of urine , then take him immediately to the doctor .
Child not eating the food is a common problem of all mothers-fathers .
Prepare tasty and nutritious food for children , then the child will take interest in the food for sure .
Bedwetting , this problem is considered to be normal up to the age of four or five years , but if children more than this age do it then there is also a treatment for them .
The biggest reason of bed wetting is decrease in the capacity of the bladder .
While sleeping when the bladder becomes full then the brain wakes up the person , but many times the brains of some children are not so active and they wet the bed .
There is also the treatment for the bedwetting of the child .
When the child starts going for toilet at daytime , then ask him to control urine for some time .
Gradually the capacity to control will increase in him .
Make the child have his breakfast by 7 . 30 or eight in the morning .
Do not give more liquid to him at night .
If the child is in the habit of drinking milk before going to bed then certainly make him drink the milk by eight o'clock at night .
Ask him to go to the bathroom before going to sleep , so that he does not wet his bed .
Do not scold the child in front of everyone for wetting the bed but make him understand in loneliness .
The day he does not wet his bed praise him and take outside .
The child can get two types of appendicitis - first acute and second sub-acute .
In acute type the child gets intense pain around the naval which later on shifts in the lower part of the abdomen .
In the acute type the child may also get high fever .
In such case immediate need of doctoral help is required , otherwise the situation worsens gradually and the death of the child may also occur .
In sub acute appendix the child gets acute pain after meals .
In some days the pain of sub acute appendix becomes alright , but in some days the pain starts happening again .
Therefore many times on getting intense pain it is important to get ultrasound done and the advice for operation is given when the appendix becomes visible .
The protection of appendix may also be done .
Never tell the child to defecate fast .
You must teach him not to put very high pressure while defecating , on the contrary defecate gradually and easily .
Protect from malaria and dengue .
The symptoms of malaria become visible five-six days after the biting of anopheles mosquito .
This mosquito of malaria affects the red blood corpuscles .
IT would be better if you make the child sleep in the mosquito net .
Mat and coil may also prove harmful for the child .
On getting the chicken pox immediately visit the doctor and treat according to his advice .
keep the child in clean environment and do not treat him as per your wish .
Some injections are also important for children .
The vaccine of BCG should be given within 15 days of the birth of the child .
The vaccination of BCG protects the child from tuberculosis and the diseases related to that .
Do not put any type of antiseptic cream or spirit on the place before putting BCG .
bathe the child properly with soap and clean water .
The vaccine of DPT protects the child from the contagious diseases of the throat , tetanus , phlegmatic cough etc .
The DPT vaccination is essential to be given on the interval of four weeks on 6-10-14 months of the child .
Together with vaccination the child must also be made to drink the medicine of polio .
It is important to give first booster dose to the child of 15 to 18 months , together with it the first dose of OPV is also given .
The second dose of DPT booster should be given within 4-6 years .
After the second booster dose of DPT the child gets mild fever , vomiting , irritation etc , but this state is not dangerous , the condition is stabilised after giving paracetamol .
Hepatitis B protects from the dangerous diseases like cancer of liver and jaundice .
Hepatitis B is put on three determined dates .
At the time of birth , one month and then on six months .
The vaccination of measles is given in 8-9 months which protects the skin of the child from contagious diseases .
The vaccination of MMR protects the child from measles , mumps etc .
In 15 to 18 months it is important to put MMR inoculation .
The inoculation of typhoid is given after two years .
Though some new vaccines are not included in the list of vaccines but in order to be safe from many dangerous diseases it is very important to get this vaccines .
They may be put by going to private hospitals .
Brain fever or meningitis can be put on the decided dates after the child becomes of two months .
The vaccine of Hepatitis A protects the child from jaundice and contagious diseases of the liver .
The vaccine of Hepatitis A is pit three times .
After the age of two months three vaccines of Hepatitis are given to the child at the interval of six months .
The vaccine of chicken pox is given after the age of one year .
If there is cold to a child of less than three years of age , then give steam for some time .
save the child from cold air and keep his feet warm .
For the protection against cold in children more than three years of age .
Grind nicely one clove in half spoon of water .
Put 2-3 drops of water into it and prepare a thin paste .
Leave this  paste applied on the forehead and nose of the child for the entire night .
Till the time the cold becomes alright , repeat this process .
Boil white onion .
Take the juice out after squeezing the onion .
Make equal quantity of honey in one spoon of juice .
By consuming this mixture twice daily both the fever of the child and cold will vanish .
Mix a spoon of honey in half teaspoon of basil and half teaspoon of ginger .
Whenever there is complaint of cold to the child in day , make the child lick this mixture .
In fever and cough also this mixture is beneficial .
Put four-five leaves of basil , some ginger and one spoonful of jaggery in a cup of water and boil it till the time the water becomes half .
By taking this syrup two times a day the child will experience relief in cold .
If there is pain in the stomach of the child then massage two-four drops of castor oil on the naval of the child .
In case of pain in children from six months to three years of age mix half teaspoon of brandy and one teaspoon of honey .
By consuming it twice daily one can get high benefits .
Mix one pinch of turmeric in a cup of luke warm milk and make him drink twice daily .
Mix 2-3 strands of saffron in luke warm milk and make him drink twice daily .
Boil little bit of ginger in a glassful of water till the time it becomes half .
Now sieve the water .
Make the child drink this water two spoonfuls twice daily .
If there is problem of gas in stomach .
If there is the problem of gas in children above the age of two years then make them chew one part ajmoda and one part of fennel mixed with one part of sugar , immediately there would be relief from gas .
In order to get relief in gas give fried asafoetida and black salt and carom seed with luke warm water .
Boil half teaspoon of black cinnamon and 5-6 basil leaves till it becomes half , by taking twice in a day one can get relief in fever .
In one glass water mix half spoon of black cinnamon , 5-6 leaves of basil and three-quarter spoon of sudarshan powder .
Boil this mixture till the time it becomes half .
By taking two spoons in a day there is relief in the fever .
When there are lice in the head of the child .
Wash the head of the child after massaging the paste of bitter almond on the scalp of the head .
Boil some leaves of neem or basil and daily wash the head of the child with this .
Do not feed more than required to the child .
Feed nutritious food to the child by making it tasty .
Include curd , raspberry , germinated pulses , apple , honey , almond , soybean , lemon etc in the diet of the child .
Do not give sweet food more than required .
Do not give much fried food to the child .
Everyday certainly make the child drink a little bit of warm water .
The milk of the mother is definitely the best diet for children , but give something such to the growing child which protects them from diseases .
Children get boundless vitamins and minerals through fruits .
The food of the child should be complete .
If there is no balance in the diet of children , then it does not take long for then to fall ill .
Not just this , there health is affected forever .
Take care of the diet of the children .
The children are very vulnerable so taking care of then is the primary concern of the house .
If full attention is not given to them then they start falling sick very fast .
The chief reason for children falling sick is the carelessness in food .
And also maximum children escape from eating food or they like such food in which there is less nutrition .
Now it depends on you that what kind of food habits you inculcate in your child in childhood .
It is important for the children to get complete nutrition .
The initial 12 years of age are extremely important .
This is such time when they are growing up fast .
The need of nutritious substances is more in them .
These nutritive substances are protein , fat , vitamins , iron , calcium and minerals etc .
Such diets should be given to the child which can fulfil the need of all these elements , by which his growth can occur properly and his weight also increases with age .
Children become obstinate in having food .
Whatever right or wrong the will of the child says , they eat .
If the child is eating anything like this , then they should not be scolded .
Give such food to children by which they do not get attracted to junk food in the first place .
In order to give complete nutrition to the child give at least four-five times the snacks etc . which have been prepared at home .
get regular checkups done to the child .
With regular check up one can know of the growth and weight of the children .
Your activity only can keep your child healthy .
The child should start eating food by his own hands by the time he reaches one year of age .
The changed form of food like shape and taste will attract the child towards eating .
By the age of two-three years of age the liking and disliking of the child starts coming to the forefront .
These habits may change every month .
This is not a thing of worry , if the child is growing sufficiently then give him different types of food everyday .
In 4-6 years there is need to eat food in large quantity .
In 6 to 12 years he becomes able to give full attention towards food .
Whenever he feels hungry he eats food .
Praise him for good habits related to food .
These should be the diet of the children .
Give VitaminC rich food to children everyday , like citrus fruits or their juice , tomatoes , potatoes , green chilli etc .
Vitamin A rich food like lettuce , carrot and sweet potato etc . are also important .
Milk and other dairy products should be given to the child up to the age of two years .
At least two percent milk and fatty things should be given in food .
fat is of two types .
Saturated fat and unsaturated fat .
Saturated fat like butter , cream , ghee etc and unsaturated like fatless food materials .
Out of these unsaturated fat only should be given to the children in large quantities .
Saturated fat should be given maximum up to 15 percent only .
Light meat , fish etc also are also very beneficial to the children .
Escape from giving fried and food material of excess fat .
The diet of the children should be of what kind ?
For children of 1 to 3 years half bowl of potato or rice , fresh fruits , one or half chapatti .
half bowl of porridge or khichdi and half glass of milk two times a day .
For children of 4 to 6 years - half bowl potato or rice , one chapatti , little bit of green vegetable and dal , one bowl porridge or khichdi , fruits .
For children from 7 to 12 years of age-one small bowl potato vegetable or aloo paratha , little bit of rice , dal and curd , raw vegetable , two chapattis , carrot , radish , cucumber , cabbage , tomato etc should be included in salad .
In the complete diet of the child some things like fruits , milk , sweets , vegetables , if non vegetarian then meat , eggs are very important .
It is important for the child to get these things daily in a fixed quantity .
These all things should be given to the child according to the age .
For children of 1 to 3 years - one fourth to half cup of juice .
For children from 4 to 6 years of age - you can give one cup of fruit juice , any fruit like apple are banana , oranges etc .
Daily at least two or three times fruits and fruit juice are very important for the nutrition of the child .
For children of 7 to 12 years of age - one egg , one ounce meat or fish etc .
For children of up to 1 to 3years - one egg , one ounce meat or fish etc .
For children of up to 7 to 12 years - one to two eggs , 2-3 ounce meat or fish etc .
Normally in a day a child needs three to four times milk or products made from milk .
The quantity of the things made from milk should also be given according to the age .
For children from 1 to 3 years one to one and half cup milk or products made from milk .
For children from 7 to 12 years one or two cups of milk is important for his health .
Give cooked or raw vegetable at least three times a day to every child according to the age .
One fourth cup to children fro 1 to 3 years .
One third to half cup to children from 4 to 6 years .
Half to one cup to children from 7 to 12 years .
For the fulfilment of calorie certainly give fatty things like oil , tasty food made of butter , but according to his age .
Half to one table spoon to children from 1 to 3 years .
One table spoon to children from 4 to 6 years .
The children may be given sweets or desserts at the interval of two or four days according to tier taste .
Pudding , custard , sweets can be included in these .
From birth to three years of age - around 1000 calories .
4 to 6 years of age 1200 to 1300 calorie .
7 to 12 years of age 15 to 2300 calorie .
From the time of birth to three years of age 1 . gram protein , according to per kilogram weight .
4 to 6 years of age 1 . gram , according to per kilogram weight .
7 to 12 years 1 gram per kilogram according to the weight .
If you are giving balanced food consisting of fruits and vegetables then this food will fulfil the requirement of vitamin and mineral .
Mother 's milk is complete food for child .
For at least 6 months the mother should breastfeed her child .
By consuming mother 's milk it gets important antibiotics , which protects him from infection in the initial days .
In the initial two three days the milk which comes out from the mother 's breast is called colostrum .
The antibiotic obtained from the mother 's milk provides the child with the power to fight .
Initially the milk secreted is only 30-40 millilitre but gradually it starts increasing .
But the matter worth paying attention is that if the mother does not feed her child for six to seven days then in 90 percent women the milk stops being secreted .
Mind it that when the child sucks the milk then there is stimulation due to that and more milk starts coming to the breast .
How many times should milk be fed to the child ?
In the newly born child there is no set timetable for hunger .
However from the third or fourth day of his birth he should not be put to the habit of being fed the milk several times at the interval of every two hours .
The child less than six months of age can take sleep of more than five hours in one go without being woken up by hunger .
By the time it is three months old your child will start taking the milk at the interval of every two hours .
Breast feeding mothers should pay attention .
Never feed the outer milk with bottle .
Many times because of being fed the outer milk with bottle the child leaves taking mother 's milk .
Feed milk with sterilised spoon and bowl .
If feeding outer milk is important then do not use the canned milk .
Use the milk which is coming to the house .
If the milk is full cream then feed the milk to the child only after removing the cream .
Do not add water to the milk , because the protein substance present in the milk will be harmful to the child .
By adding water in the milk 90 percent in it becomes water and 10 percent milk .
To what extent is milk essential for the child , this depends on the growth of the child .
Never feed the child when lying .
The child is being breast fed or it is getting the outer milk , but make it burp after his drinking .
For this take the child on your shoulder and gradually rub its back so that the burp comes .
Doing this is important because along with the child drinking the milk air also enters through the sides of the mouth and by making the child burp the air trapped inside the stomach comes out .
How should be the initial solid food of the child ?
The mother is expected to show the growth and weight of her six month old baby to the doctor and after being directed from him give it little food .
Do not give him canned food but such fresh food which has been prepared and cooked by you .
Such fresh food is the best diet for the child .
Whatever is easily digestible as things made from milk like porridge , suji paayas , milk and banana , green vegetables etc give to the child in small quantities in the form of paste .
The diet of the child should be in the form of paste , wet and the one which can be swallowed easily .
Prepare the food for the child neatly and keep the salt light in it and do not put chilli at all .
Gradually the child will start liking the food .
Mind the mood of the child while breastfeeding the child or while giving the outer milk or while giving solid food .
If you are stopping the breastfeeding then do not do it suddenly else the child may also fall sick .
For stopping breastfeeding stop one feeding at one time only .
Bathing-cleansing of the child is a challenging task .
The water should not be very cold or very hot for bathing the child .
Luke warm water is good for bathing the child .
Keep the essential items at one place before bathing the child .
Do not bathe the child in open space .
Do to bathe the child immediately after feeding milk .
Wipe the eyelash of the child from outside by wetting the cotton balls in the boiled luke warm water .
Clean the nose with cotton along with cleaning hands and armpits .
Never ever apply powder to the child .
Make him wear soft cotton clothes .
When you bathe the child then there should not be any oil left on his body .
It should be bathed with a some good shampoo or soap containing glycerine .
The child must be bathed at least one and half hours after drinking the milk .
The inoculations given to children up to one year .
Get the BCG inoculation within three months after the birth .
Within six months to nine months from birth make it drink three doses of DPT and polio .
Within eight weeks to six months after the birth get three HIV inoculations .
Within three years and six months of birth make it drink six doses of vitamin A .
Within nine months to one year after the birth get it inoculated against measles .
Within one year of the birth get the inoculation for chicken pox and hepatitis A .
The growth occurring in the child of one year is like this .
In six weeks the child smiles on seeing .
In four months the child laughs and plays with his own hands and feet .
In five months the child turns over .
The child holds the toy in six months .
In seven months only his teeth start coming out .
The child starts crawling on knees in the eighth month .
In the tenth month the child gets up by holding something .
This only is the beginning of his walking .
In one year it starts uttering some words , starts understanding .
The main diseases occurring in the child of one year .
The care of child has high importance .
Infant child is very vulnerable .
The small child gets surrounded with disease on change in weather , high temperature or dip in temperature or slight carelessness in care .
The chief diseases happening in infancy .
Dysentery or diarrhoea .
Cough - cold , viral septicemia .
In this age the infant child gets diarrhoea very fast .
Dysentery is of green color or blood is coming in it or immense odour is coming .
Such happens because of infection .
Find the reasons of infection in the children .
If feeding milk from the bottle then stop feeding .
If giving water then give the water to drink on cooling after boiling it .
If such has happened then immediately consult the doctor of children and start giving the ORS solution .
Cough-cold occurs more in children who drink milk from the bottle in comparison to those who drink mother 's milk .
Therefore , if there is cough and cold then immediately contact the doctor , because cough-cold may become pneumonia on becoming bad .
High fever , fast breathing , inflammation on the body etc are the symptoms of septicemia .
Septicemia is a fast growing disease therefore , it is important to consult the doctor immediately .
It is important for every mother to keep an eye on the growth of their own young ones .
Like if the height of a child at the time of birth is 50 cm then in one year it has to be 75 cm .
If it is one or two cm less then that gap will come everywhere , which is not right .
Therefore in the first six months after the birth of the chid the child disease specialist should be consulted every second and third week .
In the seventh month every month in the year do consult the doctor so that in the upbringing of the ones child there is no lack mother .
Make the child wear soft cotton clothes so that there is no allergy .
Keep the child in warm or cool environment according to the weather .
Do not put kajal in the eyes .
Do not put oil in ear and nose .
Do not do domestic treatment .
Do not do body massage of the child , but apply some oil with light hand .
Feed the infant child with your own milk for at least up to six months .
Do not use fragrant soap and other cosmetics .
In the beginning for up to two-three months the in fact defecates for up to seven-eight times , so do not panic .
After some months the infant defecates after three-four days , then also do not panic .
Do not give water to the child apart from breast-feeding .
Visit the doctor from time to time .
Give complete attention to your own health also .
What is the right way of administering medicine to the infant ?
The medicine should always be given to the infant by making it sit in the lap .
Do not give the medicine to the child by keeping him lying or it can face difficulty in breathing due to medicine .
What should be the special precaution taken while washing the clothes of the infant ?
The child defecates and urinates repeatedly so after washing the clothes with some good antibiotic dry them nicely in the sun .
At times the clothes of the infant are left wet because of which there is a danger of the breeding of microbes in them .
These microbes can infect the infect and this infection may prove to be dangerous for the infant .
The month of June , 1999 in Uttar Pradesh was celebrated as the month of Malaria Mass Awareness .
The aim of which is to make everyone aware towards this disease and to get everyone 's participation for its prevention .
For effective control questions are asked about malaria through the medium of health workers by the state government .
for the test of people suffering from the fever blood strips are made also pills for the treatment of malaria are also given .
If signal is received of the detection of the parasite of malaria then the health workers do the treatment for the destruction of malaria from the roots .
Apart from this in all the government hospitals and health centres the facility for the test and treatment of malaria is provided free of cost .
Malaria treating medicines should be available to the rural mass , for this medicine distribution centres have been opened in various villages .
Those areas where the effect of malaria is strong there facility of the spread of pesticides has also been done .
Malaria is certainly a mass health problem but with your cooperation this disease can be controlled .
As it is known to everyone that the disease of malaria spreads by mosquitoes and the mosquitoes breed in water .
Therefore it is important that do not let the water accumulate near your house and give full attention to its drainage .
It is our duty to protect against the mosquito transmitted lethal diseases of malaria and dengue etc .
Do not let the situations rise which give birth to the mosquitoes .
Empty the accumulated water of the house at least once in a week .
Fill the nearby ditches .
Drain the water .
Get the blood tested by the health workers in the village and get the complete treatment done free of cost .
Get the blood tested in the nearby hospital or primary health center and take free treatment .
The places where the accumulation of water can not be stopped there put some drops of kerosene oil or mobil .
Your support is expected in spreading .
If pesticide is being spread in your house then see to it that the spread is done in all the rooms .
Do not accumulate broken vessels , tyre , polythene bag on the rooves of the houses and nearby .
Mosquitoes should not bite for this use mosquito net .
While sleeping apply mustard  neem oil on the exposed parts of the body .
Get net fixed on the windows and doors of the house , keep the doors and windows shut at the time of sunset .
Mass awareness is very important towards filaria .
Filaria is a social , financial and physical curse .
The symptoms of the disease of filaria are high fever , swelling in the vessels of hand and feet , pain and growth of glands , swelling in hand-feet and genitals etc .
Because of swelling in many parts of body in filaria there is obstruction in locomotion and your work efficiency also decreases .
At times the symptoms of swelling etc . is not seen in the patients of filaria .
The disease of filaria spreads by the biting of female anopheles mosquito .
Female anopheles mosquito breed in dirty water .
The culex mosquito which give rise to filaria breed in the accumulated water of nearby drain , ditches , boxes etc .
For protection and prevention against filaria do not let water accumulate anywhere near you .
Every week empty the tanks , pots and other vessels etc which are used to keep water and always keep them covered with cloth or net .
In order to prevent filaria use mosquito net while sleeping and go to sleep after applying mustard  neem oil on the body .
If in your locality filaria day is being celebrated then that day definitely get one day treatment done .
In order to be safe from filaria the person affected with this should eat diethyl carbamazine citrate  the medicine of filaria  according to the age for 12 days  six days in a week  .
The pills of medicine are available in 50 or 100 milligrams .
Therefore , according to the convenience eat and make the pills eat equal to the determined quantity .
Do not take the medicine empty stomach , eat medicine after eating something .
If there is any difficulty in eating medicine then contact nearby filaria clinic or primary health center .
The symptoms of dengue are high fever , intense body pain , headache , pain in joints , pain in the eyes and pimples on the body by which the fever of dengue can be guessed .
Apart from the above mentioned general symptoms in the serious patients suffering from dengue there can also be complaint of bleeding from teeth , mouth and nose .
In such patients tourniquet test is positive and on getting the blood tested the platelet count is found to be less that one lakh .
Dengue fever occurs after the biting of Adis egyptis mosquito .
Adis egyptis mosquito is also known with the name of tiger mosquito .
Adis egyptis mosquito bites in the daytime .
In order to prevent dengue do not accumulate water in water cooler , open tanks on the roof top , wasted empty tin bottles , vases , empty bottles  money plant bottles and cisterns .
In the house keep changing the water of the cooler , bucket pitcher twice every week .
Use the full sleeved shirt and socks etc .
At the time of going to the school surely make the boys  girls wear full sleeved clothes , socks and shoes .
Get insecticides spread in the house .
Keep the house and the nearby environment clean .
At the time of the severity of the disease , on getting the fever take treatment from the nearby government hospital  primary health center .
The fever of malaria comes with shivering and cold the third day .
Malaria virus spreads because of the biting of the female anopheles mosquito .
Anopheles mosquito are born in clean water and bite at night .
They breed in the vessels  tanks used to accumulate water , in the clean water accumulated in the tanks at the rooftop .
The age of menopause in each woman is different .
According to the Dutch study this is hereditary quality .
According to the Dutch study the age at which menopause starts in the mother , in the same age the daughter also gets menopause .
As for example if the menopause of the mother has happened in the age of 45 years and the age of the daughter is 38 years and she wants to get pregnant then in such case it is very difficult for her .
To this extent that even if her menstruation is happening regularly till this age then also the chances to become the mother becomes extremely less .
The reason for this is the change in the hormones of the body which affects the fertility of the woman .
Make your doctor familiar with the hereditary nature of your menopause beforehand .
So that according to the premenopausal condition and fertility they can give you the right direction .
Before knowing about heart attack it is very important to know whether your father or mother had suffered from heart attack before the age of 70 years ?
If any of the mother - father had to face this disease then in such case it is very important for you to take precaution .
Professor Marion Joe Ligeto of the Columbia University has to say that 80 % of the diseases of heart is related to gene .
If any of the father and the mother have got a heart attack before the age of 70 years then its chance increases three times more in the child .
In such case it is important that you keep getting the important test done like serum lipid profile blood test , stress echocardiogram etc .
The gene is dominant in such a manner that despite taking extra precaution the chances of heart attack keeps looming .
Yes , if you want then you can save yourself from this disease by exercising three times in a week for up to 50 minutes .
It is not a big thing for diabetes to occur in those children whose mother-father have the disease of diabetes .
If you do not have the symptoms of the disease of diabetes and you are feeling yourself as healthy then also you should get yourself checked up in every three years .
If this disease is not hereditary then also the check up for diabetes should be done after the age of 50 years .
By exercising three to five times for 30 minutes weekly and by taking nutritious food the danger of diabetes may be averted .
If the mother had to cross the state of miscarriage once or twice then in such case at the time of conception once more in order to escape from the situation of miscarriage again , some special types of medicines have to be taken .
By those medicines the child does become normal , but the side effects of these medicines may take the form of cancer .
If the mother had miscarriage then in such case the daughter should get regular check up done from the doctor before conception .
Often in childhood sunburns occur by roaming a lot in sunlight .
By doing the treatment at the right time the sunburns also get healed .
But the ultraviolet radiations present in the rays of the sun damage the skin forever which can take the form of cancer later on .
Take information from your father and mother whether they had ever got the diagnosis of melanoma .
In such case even if the child had taken immense precaution in the childhood then also the chances of the occurrence of melanoma , which is a serious form of cancer , increases 8 times .
Use sunscreen in order to escape from skin cancer .
Inspect your skin every month .
if suddenly a wart appears at any time then do not ignore it .
If the father or mother had to suffer from depression at any time then in such case the chance of depression occurring in the daughter increases by many times .
Not only this , depression can also occur in more than one member of the family .
In such case it is very important to control depression .
It is not essential that depression is considered a disease only when the patient goes to the doctor after being infested with the disease .
Depression occurs naturally which has its effect on both mind and brain .
Among the people who are victims of depression only 20 -25 % people are such which take the treatment on time by considering it a disease .
The symptoms of depression are becoming sad , hopelessness , worrying and sleeplessness .
If you are aware that any of your father or mother has suffered from depression then in such cases it is essential to take precautions from the beginning .
Increase your friend circle in order to escape from depression .
In order to escape from depression make some such friends with whom you can share the pessimistic thoughts that you feel inside .
Generate energy in your own self .
If depression occurs repeatedly then take the advice of doctor .
The milk diet taken in childhood is the most important thing for the growth of the children .
The child gets total nutrition from milk of the mother .
The intake of milk in sufficient quantity provides strength to the body .
When the body does not get sufficient milk then its deficiency may infest the body with disease in future .
According to a study done by the Cincinnati Children Hostel Medical Centre , the bones of those women who had drunk less milk in childhood is weaker in comparison to those who had drunk sufficient milk in childhood between 20 to 50 years .
This way the danger of the fracture of bones in women is also more .
There is a danger of the occurrence of osteoporosis in the female child if the bone of the mother or the maternal grandmother of the child has got damaged in any accident occurring after the age of forty years .
The doctors have to say that no matter through what phase of age you are crossing , you can escape from the disease of osteoporosis by making your own bones strong .
Everyday the quantity of 1000 to 1500 milligram of calcium can be obtained from any dairy product .
The quantity of 1000 to 1500 milligram of calcium proves beneficial for the bones .
Osteoporosis disease occurs due to the weakening of the bones .
To keep getting regular tests done in pregnancy is very important .
With this test many things become known beforehand only .
Whether there are twin children in the womb .
Whether the weight of the pregnant woman is increasing in the right manner .
Whether she has deficiency of blood .
You yourself may do tests of some matters .
Darkness on the face , whiteness in the nails and eyes , getting tired by doing even slight work , these all are the symptoms of the deficiency of blood .
High swelling due to which anklets and bangles also become tight are the symptoms of danger .
Immediately take the advice of A . . . behanji  health worker on seeing such symptoms .
If due to any reason you do not want the child that has come in the womb only then take the advice of A . . . or any doctor .
If you eat any herb or try to abort the child by inserting something in your vagina through any maid or yourself then there may be danger to your life .
All these methods are unhealthy due to which the child does get aborted but such an infection occurs in the body of the mother which may even take her life .
Therefore before taking any such decision certainly meet the A . . . First .
A . . . Will give you the right advice .
During pregnancy even after taking all the precautions at times there may be difficulties .
Therefore always get the delivery done under the guidance of a skilful nurse . . . . or doctor .
If any complication had occurred during the delivery of the first child or the baby was delivered born dead , then without second thought get the delivery done in the hospital .
Get yourself checked up during pregnancy .
The inverting of the child becomes known through this .
In such situation the condition of surgery may arise and the delivery may have to be done in the hospital .
You must have seen that at times in pregnancy or during delivery major faults occur .
By which danger occurs on the life of both mother and child .
What should be done in order to escape from these ?
At first always those matters should be kept in mind which are the symptoms of dangerous situation .
Like bleeding during pregnancy or delivery .
Persistence of pain for more than 12 hours or occurrence of fits .
In such situation immediately go to a big hospital without delay where all health services are got for free .
But are the whereabouts of the hospital known to you beforehand ?
Have you arranged for a vehicle to take the pregnant woman ?
Is the arrangement of money for fare and all with you ?
Have you arranged for blood ?
Lack or delay of anything in the hour of need may be saddening .
Therefore these arrangements must be done beforehand so that on need the pregnant women should be taken to the hospital immediately and every work gets completed nicely .
At times even after all the tests emergency situation arises during pregnancy .
At the time of birth of child the mother suffers from lengthy pains .
More than required lengthy pain may be dangerous .
Persistence of pain for more than 12 hours is a signal of danger .
At times the child is born inverted or abnormal , his hands - feet or any body part comes out first .
This situation may be very dangerous .
Without losing a moment make the pregnant woman reach the hospital .
Some other symptoms as well are the symptoms of danger .
If there are fits , there is feeling of stiffness , there is continuous headache , bleeding starts then do not delay at all and immediately get the tests done after going to a big hospital .
During delivery two more symptoms are the signals of serious danger .
During pregnancy deep red blood starts flowing in large quantity .
If the umbilical cord does not come out completely then immediately make the pregnant woman reach the hospital .
There could be delay in the preparation in the need of the hour and there could be danger to the life of both mother - child .
Make some arrangements in advance .
Tell the name of big hospital to family members and keep some money safe separately .
One more very important arrangement you can make in advance and keep .
Make your husband or a responsible person of your family understand beforehand that in emergency situation , not to waste time in argument .
Immediately take the decision to go to the hospital .
Take full precaution even after delivery .
Do not show carelessness .
Keep an eye on the health of both mother - child .
Sometimes even small things may get converted into big dangers .
Within one month after delivery if fever comes to the mother or repeatedly fever goes and comes back or then the flow of blood does not stop then without wasting a moment take her to a big hospital immediately .
There the doctor will do the test for this complication and will immediately do its treatment .
The arrangement of blood is a very important work .
During pregnancy there is often the deficiency of blood in women .
If any danger arises during delivery then excess blood may flow out of the body of mother .
In such situation it may be required to give her more blood .
In such time it is the moral responsibility of all the males of the household and the neighborhood to give blood .
Make your own brother , friend , family member or villagers ready beforehand for blood donation .
At least two blood donators definitely go to the hospital so that on requirement blood may be received by the pregnant woman .
One important thing - there is no weakness in the body by giving blood and the same blood is manufactured in the body again in half an hour .
Green vegetable , pulses , lentils are qualitative for mother - child therefore during pregnancy eat nutritious food and in right quantity .
Do not do any abstinence in the case of food .
Eat that food which your heart desires by which iron is obtained in abundant quantity .
Do you know in which items these iron substances are found more ?
Iron elements are found in high quantity in green leafy vegetables and lentils .
In cereals iron elements are found in wheat , jowar , bajra , pulses with peels and jaggery .
In non vegetarian food items like meat , liver etc . also iron elements are found in enough quantity .
Therefore you must eat these things of iron elements .
Even eat vegetables and lentils of green leaves every alternate day .
Pregnant women should not drink tea before and after meals .
Due to the consumption of tea the use of iron elements found in food does not take place completely .
Lemon , orange , guava , raspberry and raw mango with meals increases the use of this iron element in the body .
Eating tablets given by A . . . sister  Anganwadi activist is also very necessary for not letting the blood lack in body .
If the child falls sick then should consumption be stopped ?
If the child odes not eat then would he not become weak ?
Therefore on child falling sick also do not stop feeding food to him .
As you would have already seen that in illness the child behaves of the age younger to his age .
In such condition you will have to give more attention to the child .
It may be that you will have to feed the child with your hand little by little .
If the child drinks milk then make him drink milk regularly .
For becoming alright the body of the child needs strength and that strength is obtained from your milk or food only .
In such condition do not show carelessness , in sickness keep giving food to the weak child .
With this the child gets help in becoming alright fast .
After becoming alright make the child eat more food than his average dose , for at least one weak so that the weakness produced due to illness may be reduced .
Dirty utensils and dirty hands spread disease .
Wash hands with soap and keep nails short .
After toilet or after cleaning the child ' s toilet certainly wash hands with soap .
There are many harmful microbes in the toilet of the child , therefore before cooking or feeding always wash properly with soap .
In anganbari nutritious food and proper care are received for mother and child both .
The weight of children less than six years is taken so that it can be known whether his growth is happening properly or not .
Apart from this by going to anganwari you will also get to know many information regarding the right growth of child .
Like the information for the correct upbringing of the child .
The information of inoculation of the child and the information of health of children .
Apart from this for the mental growth of child proper education is also given here to children of 3 . years .
Now your child is growing up and his body has started growing .
The child needs more meals , more food .
Now for child your milk only is not enough .
Now the child needs food two - three times in a day .
That too such , which the child may eat with interest .
Now the teeth of the child have not come out .
In such a situation what will you make him eat ?
Give the child mashed things in food like mashed roti , dalia , mashed fruits and vegetables .
Things from outside or cooking special things for the child is not required .
Make the child eat things cooked at home .
Certainly use one - two spoons of oil in food .
Feed the child half bowl of food two - three times .
At times it happens such that when you are busy in work or you go out then you do not forget feeding meal to the child , take some time out for that .
On the attainment of one year age of the child increase his dose .
Now instead of feeding the child two - three times a day feed him at least half bowl of food five - six times a day .
You should not feed the child till the time he does not start eating his entire food after asking it from you on his own .
Keep complete care of cleanliness .
Go to the anganbari by rule and get nutritious food .
You must be even knowing anganbari well .
Where pregnant women , mothers feeding breast milk and young children get nutritious food and there care is taken .
You also go to anganbari by rule and certainly eat the nutritious things that you get from there .
This way by going to the anganbari your care would also be taken and because of getting nutritious food the health of your and your child ' s health would also be alright .
` The nutritious food of anganbari should be received by you apart from the food at the house .
Keep eating the nutritious food at home in the same way as was advised earlier .
Contraceptives have given new description to women and new dimension as well .
Especially because of the contraceptive pills they got the right to take the decision on their own to give birth to the child .
Apart from healthy and active life to women the contraceptives have also given this self confidence that they themselves have the right on their body .
Contraceptives have helped in making life of women simple .
Now they are capable of living their life according to their own wish .
When they want children , how many children , whether they want or not , they can decide this with the help of their life partner .
Birth of child is now not her compulsion , it is her own decision .
She has also proved to be a good mother by this .
A healthy woman , consisting of self confidence only can give a better future to the society .
The woman plays an important role in the betterment of own child and the entire family through less children and proper gap in the age of children and in this contraceptives help her in every step .
The history of contraceptives is also told to be very old , despite this they got a developed form in this century only .
More important than this is that first time the identity of women got approval in the form of a human being .
What is conception ?
When the sperms of man meet with the ovum of woman then conception takes place .
But before this conception many situations are formed .
Firstly the sperms reach the uterus by going through the vaginal canal and enter the fallopian tube .
Here in the broad portion of the tube there is mating with the developed eggs which comes out of the ovary .
On entering the eggs sperms mix their chromosomes with the egg .
The egg gets fertilized and after developing gets converted into a multicelled ball which is called blastocyst .
This gets attached to the surface of the uterus .
The contact with the muscles of the tube and the cilia lining as thin as hair advance the egg towards uterus .
The egg does not advance on its own .
Every month many eggs are developed but in hair follicle only one egg is able to develop .
The other eggs get squeezed on their own .
Lakhs of sperms enter the uterus but maximum get destroyed due to the reason of the acidic substances inside .
One or two out of whatever sperms escape get attached to the outer layer of the egg and the moment conception takes place , it puts a ban on the entry of other sperms .
Following situations come in conception .
Sperms passes through the uterus and goes to the fallopian tube .
The egg enters the tube .
The sperm makes the egg conceive .
The zygote gets divided into two .
64 cells of zygote enter inside the uterus .
This gets converted into a seed .
On reaching its destination the seed gets connected with the surface of the uterus .
Here it gets nutritive substances from the blood cells of the mother .
Related to the menstrual cycle generally women have this misbelief that it is dirty blood and the more it flows out of the body the better it is .
But this is a very wrong misbelief .
Actually the reason of menstruation is the destruction of inner wall of skin inside the uterus , that is , the endometruim line .
The thinner this wall would be , that much less would be the flow of blood .
Because of excess flow there is a deficiency of iron elements in the body of the woman and the woman becomes victim of anemia .
Actually menstrual cycle is one such physical change in the body of women which comes entirely within the system of reproduction and is very important for reproduction .
The menstruation coming every month is the time between the onset of puberty and menarche .
During the menstrual cycle from the body of fully mature woman during ovulation ovum is released , with this the lining of uterus , endometrium develops that time only .
After ovulation this lining prepares the reproduced egg and conception takes place .
If conception does not take place then a new menstrual cycle starts .
This is the part of the endometrium and blood products which comes through the passage of vagina .
Generally the menstrual cycle is of 28 days .
It has three phases - in first phase menstruation  from 1 up to 5 days  .
In the second phase the hormone cycle  from 6 up to 13 days  .
The third phase suitable for reproduction  14 to 28  .
Before the start of menstruation many changes in the hormones take place , whose maximum effect is seen on the behavior of the women , like the increase of irritation , some stiffness in breast , increase of weight , swelling etc .
Because of the reason of the bursting of ovarian cyst many times there is sudden pain in abdomen .
Many times blood also starts flowing heavily , the reason of occurrence of both these complications together is soreness in genitals .
But there is no need to panic in this because these diseases become alright easily by proper treatment .
Generally there is a misbelief that four days prior to menstruation , four days of menstruation and four days after menstruation are very safe , but this is possible only when your menstruation is regular .
The second method is that everyday the woman takes her temperature and notes that in a diary .
The day on which temperature rises by one degree then believe that egg has been produced this day .
Five days before and after this day are said to be unsafe .
By recording the temperature for three - four months the woman can easily get to know her unsafe days easily .
Various methods are present for contraception , you have to choose according to your ease .
Because of not using the methods of contraception children are born one after the other and by becoming victim of malnutrition go to the embraces of death .
In the entire world death of around 60 thousand children takes place , out of this 99 percent deaths occur only in developing countries .
The mother and child should stay healthy and fit and proper gap should be there between two children , for all these it is important that methods of contraception should be used .
For men condom is very cheap and is a simple option and it also saves them from many infections .
There should be knowledge of the method of its proper use .
Apart from this because of this the woman has to depend completely on the man .
After discharging instead of putting the semen in the woman ' s vagina he throws it outside .
Though it is a good and free of cost option , but because of this the danger of conception is maintained without interruption .
In the process of vasectomy also that passage is closed without incision through which the sperms flow .
What is to be understood is that only the passage is closed .
This is a small work of 15 minutes .
By coming on his own the person can go back home on his own .
After vasectomy he can do his daily work as usual .
In vasectomy one precaution has to be taken , for the next three months while doing intercourse condom has to be used .
After vasectomy on the interval of one month and then in the third month coming for the doctoral test is important and after the doctoral report intercourse can be done without any tension without any condom .
But for this men do not agree easily .
The options for contraception for women .
Women can use pills , cream , jelly , sponge etc . which are put in the genitals so that semen can not go inside .
The pills are put some minutes before intercourse or on need may be put one hour before .
During six hours if intercourse is done again then it is important to put the tablet again in the genital .
Copper T is a good option , these are of several types .
Copper T 200 - this may be put for three years .
Copper T 380 A - this may be put for ten years .
Multiload copper T 250 and 375 - this may be put for five years .
By this technique semen may be stopped from coming inside .
But get the copper T fixed only when there is no pregnancy .
As menstruation starts or as it ends you may get it fixed .
After getting the copper T fixed there is no need to use any other contraceptive option at all .
After getting the copper T fixed get the doctoral check up done certainly in the interval of one month and then three months and then every six months .
In market some emergency contraceptive pills are available .
These are such pills which are taken in emergency that is then when conception takes place by mistake .
These should be taken between 72 hours of conception .
After this take five days morning - evening .
Taking two pills immediately during conception morning - evening and two pills 12 hours after pregnancy the risk of pregnancy is averted .
When the family is completely planned , then through surgery also women may get rid of pregnancy forever .
This is done in two ways - first through telescope and second by cutting the stomach slightly .
By telescope the fallopian tube is either tied or destroyed .
By incising the stomach also this process may be done .
Both these processes are painless and hundred percent successful contraceptives .
At our place since long intercourse is done by calculating the days which is considered a successful contraceptive option to a great extent .
Apart from this regular and uninterrupted breast feeding is also considered to be a good contraceptive .
In today ' s modern world though there are options one after the other like condom , pills which are kept in the genitals , copper T , etc , but the most effective options are contraceptive pills .
Contraceptive pills are those pills which are eaten which women find the most comforting .
In modern times Karl Deresy is considered to be the genitor of contraceptive pills .
These pills on going to the body of the female stop the female from conceiving .
Because of pills no new eggs are formed in the body of the female .
In the contraceptive pills of yesteryears the quantity of estrogen and progesterone used to be very high which had several ill effects .
But in modern pills there is no such danger .
These pills provide cent percent protection to the woman .
By this the menstrual cycle becomes regular .
The pain and blood flow occurring these days also reduces by which the complaint of anemia does not occur .
Apart from this , protection from the tumor of the breast etc . also takes place .
In 1970 some sort of reduction in the level of hormone had been brought .
After this its as if the standard of contraceptive pills have started improving .
Today these pills have only been considered to be the best contraceptives .
Some times back from now there used to be 21 days and 28 days course of contraceptive pills .
For 21 days one pill only had to be taken daily according to fixed time .
Now the pill to be taken once a week has also come .
These contraceptive pills are easily available in the market which may be bought from any chemist .
These pills may be bought from any medical store .
Related information is attached with these contraceptive pills .
Obesity does not only make the personality unattractive , it even attracts many diseases .
How should be the lifestyle for staying fit ?
No one wants that there should be useless fat on his body but due to carelessness in lifestyle weight starts increasing and many types of diseases start surrounding .
Today piling up of fat on body is a universal problem .
It should in fact be said that in case of obesity India is slowly on path of America .
Here obesity is given the status of disease .
Here every third person is victim of obesity .
If said in the language of the doctors , then any person becomes obese when in comparison to the calorie used by him he consumes calorie in more quantity through the medium of food and other food materials .
This imbalance in the consumed and used calorie may arise due to various reasons .
Now this depends on the particular person that which reason is responsible for him becoming fat .
Obesity may also happen due to hereditary reasons .
Although this is also a fact that the food habits and life style of some families are the ones which increase obesity .
But despite this , it has been proved in researches that somewhere the biological makeup of human body is also responsible for obesity .
Especially for adopted children it has already been proved that there is much closeness in their weight and the weight of their real parents in comparison to the weight of their adopted parents .
Environmental reasons also become a cause for obesity .
In this the lifestyle and food related habits are included .
What any person eats and how much he is involved in physical activity , it has a direct relation with his health , especially the weight of the body .
If he does not burn the calorie received through food , then extra calorie starts accumulating in his body in the form of fat .
And lastly the result is the person becoming victim of obesity .
Today people eat a lot of fast food and fried things but save their skin from labor .
At homes modern instruments are present for the help of women , then children keep sitting in front of TV , computer for hours .
Not only this their mouth is always full with chips , chocolates and other market things .
On the other hand seven - eight hours of a day of office going women - men are spent sitting on the chair .
What is meant by saying is that the opportunities for man to be included in physical activities are becoming less and less and the consequences are in front .
Even the smell of food makes the person obese .
Many times even when there is no hunger he comes towards the food attracted with the smell and in return he gets more calorie than the required .
Psychological reasons also become the cause of obesity .
On being mentally unhealthy also there is tendency of man to eat more .
Especially , on being victim of tension , sadness , anger or inferiority complex not only do the people eat more , but at regular intervals they also get the urge to eat something or the other .
This way they not only receive calorie in high quantity but by repeated eating the eaten food also does not get digested and the rate of their digestion  the rate of the consumption of energy  becomes disrupted .
In such situation it becomes a difficult task for them to get rid of obesity .
But it is seen up to the extent that the enthusiasm towards life in the person disturbed mentally diminishes .
And in such situation he becomes depressed towards keeping himself fit or to reduce obesity .
The diseases occurring due to obesity .
Heart attack , sugar  type B  , stone in gall bladder , high blood pressure etc .
many types of cancer like cancer of intestine and prostrate in men , then the cancer of reproductive organs , uterus , ovary , breast and gall bladder etc .
The disease of joints , the disease of liver , sleep apnia that is obstruction in breathing for some moments during sleep .
In women the irregularity of menstruation and infertility etc happen .
Some special types of diseases also make the body of the person fatty .
Hypothyroidism , depression , consumption of steroids or anti - depressant medicines are some such situations , when fat starts building up on the body of the person .
In women they have seen to become fat especially on the occurrence of the complication of thyroid or after the surgery of uterus .
Similarly after delivery also they become fat in an abnormal way .
Although their weight starts increasing during pregnancy , but this is the stage of overweight , not that the quantity of fat starts increasing on the body .
While after giving birth to the child fat only increases on their body , gaining control over which is many times beyond their limits .
Often the meaning of obesity for people is the increase of weight , but this is not the right definition of obesity .
According to medical experts , in the increased weight the weight of everything like muscles , bones , fat and water are included .
While with obesity the meaning is - accumulation of fat in body in proportion higher than a certain quantity .
That is the direct relation of obesity is with fat , not with the increased weight of the body .
Like if we consider body builders and athletes then their weight is very high .
Despite this body builders and athletes are not fat .
Body builders and athletes are stay absolutely fit and healthy .
But this does not mean at all that fat is bad every ways .
It is important that in every human being there should be fat in certain quantity for storage of energy in the body , for the maintenance of enough heat , to bear the shocks from outside or to other such important works .
You are fat or whether you are fat or not , to know this it is important to know BMI or body mass index .
The easy way to know BMI is - BMI = weight  height  square meter  .
If the BMI is between 25 and 29 . , then it is considered that the weight of the person is more , while people with BMI of 30 or more than 30 are called obese .
Though BMI is incapable of saying this that in a person the quantity of fat is more or that of muscles , bones , fat , and water etc .
Then also with its help the quantity of fat can be estimated to a very great extent .
To know this together with the weight of the person his height  in square meter  is also needed and in height all the organs of the person are included to a very great extent .
There is no alternative to exercise in reducing obesity , But if you feel that strolling morning - evening is exercise then it is completely wrong .
With exercise the meaning is - to bring the heart rate to the level of 75 percent to its rate after doing exercise for 20 to 60 minutes .
Like if your age is 40 years , then your desired heartbeat rate is 220 - 40 = 180 .
Your level of exercise is its 75 percent , that is it should be 135 par minute .
For this anything in cycling , jogging , aerobics may be included in the daily routine .
Together with this do yogay , also meditation , but while doing exercise you must keep certain thing in mind .
Certainly do ` warm up ' five minutes before exercise and ` cool up ' after it .
For heart patients walking fast , jogging or brisk walking are the best exercise , but if their has been a heart attack recently or there has been a bypass surgery , then definitely take the advice of the doctor before exercising .
With this keep in mind the following things in the daily routine .
Increase the duration of exercise gradually .
take deep breaths while exercising , but pay attention not to stop breathing .
keep at least an interval of one hour between meal and exercise .
Do not exercise when you are sad , in tension or angry .
Adopt controlled lifestyle .
Smoking , drinking , mental tension fuel the fire , therefore escape from them .
If you are suffering from some psychological disorder or the disorder of overeating , then contact the psychologist or psychiatrist in time .
Because of more than required weight , children are becoming victims of the diseases which occur in adults .
Increasing obesity in children ahs come up in the form a serious problem .
Children are becoming victims of diseases like diabetes .
It has become very important to control obesity .
doctors believe that the treatment of obesity should be done in childhood only .
Because due to obesity on growing up diseases like heart problem , diabetes and high blood pressure start cropping up .
In maximum children the complaint of obesity is seen in the age of 2 . years .
During this time the weight of children is more than their age , the chance of whose reduction diminish with increasing age .
In countries like India increasing urbanisation and globalisation have pit a deep impact on the food habits of children .
Today children relish the fun of TV , video game , DVD and other electronic gadgets for hours , because of which their sports have reduced .
Also with this the consumption of junk food has also increased in children , the cholesterol , and sugar which are found in them only become the main reason in increasing the quantity of calorie in the body .
Because of the reason of these junk food only around 10 to 20 percent children in India become the victims of obesity .
By 2030 approximately half of the children of the country will come in the clutches of this disease .
In a survey done recently this thing has come up that in the last 50 years the consumption of oily substances in Indian children has increased 20 percent .
In children eating candy , chocolate , pizza , hotdog , French fries and sweets the number of children in the age from 11 to 20 years is told to be around 80 percent , there the number of children from 9 - 11 years is told to be approximately 25 percent .
First a ban should be imposed on the canteens in the schools of children which sell junk food .
Apart from this at home mother - father should pay special attention on the food habits of children , by which they eat fibrous fruits and vegetables in more quantity leaving the fatty food .
The government of every country should put a prohibition on the advertisements of junk food that are shown on the TV .
Especially that time when children are watching programs on the TV .
In every school the period of yoga , exercise and PT should certainly be organised because of which their outdoor activity increases .
Also with this it is important to highlight their performance in the report card of the children , by which they themselves also stay alert .
the moment the eye of any person falls on the increased fat of his body , then immediately his attention goes towards his food and he starts dieting .
While for reducing the quantity of fat the requirement is of balanced diet .
Therefore , firstly get your check up done , so that it is assured that the weight is not increasing because of any disease .
Get a diet chart made from the dietician according to your height , weight , age , sex and routine that how much calorie you should consume through your food daily .
For your convenience some suggestions to control calorie are like this .
keep an account of you food and physical activities .
Mind it that in return to the eaten things you have done labor .
If you like eating ice then eat it after taking out the rice water .
Drink at least two litres of water everyday .
Consume seasonal fruits - vegetables in more and more quantity and consume fruits - vegetables of dark color more and more quantity and certainly eat the fruits - vegetables of dark color but eat less sweet fruits .
Do not eat mango , banana , sapota and grapes .
Eat more salad and use sprouted pulses also in this .
Always eat thin dal and eat dal with peels moong dal , horse gram dal .
For chapatti instead of using flour of mill use thick flour made in millstone with the bran .
This mixture of cereals does not let fat increase on the body .
Bring in use toned milk and instead of curd bring in use curd water mixed with black salt and carom seeds .
For cooking bring in use such oil , in which there is less cholesterol like soya bean or oil of corn .
If there is desire to eat sweets then eat such sweets , in which there has been no use ghee like petha in place of gulab jamun .
Consume less and less of fast food , meat , ghee , oil maida , sugar and dry fruits .
Consume less salt .
The direct relation of obesity is with our food habits , but the important thing is ` right eating ' not ` less eating ' .
The use of bypass surgery in the treatment of heart diseases is not very old .
This has proved to be a boon for the heart patients .
The obstruction created in the originating part of all the major arteries can be treated with bypass surgery .
Through the coronary angioplasty method a tube is made to reach the arteries of the heart through the medium of the starting point .
A balloon is fixed on this tube .
While putting the tube inside the balloon is deflated .
Studying the path of this tube on television it is taken to the place of obstruction .
Right at the pace of obstruction the balloon is inflated .
By this the obstruction in the arteries of the heart open up .
Then the tube is taken out .
There are many benefits of this method like less expenditure , no need of surgery , there is no danger of infection as well and even one does not have to stay in the hospital for more days .
But this technique can not be brought into use for all the patients .
In opening up blocked arteries E . . . proves fruitful .
E . . .  external counter pulsation  is one such technique through the medium of which the blocks occurring in the arteries can easily be removed .
The moment the obstruction of the arteries are removed the transmission of blood in the body increases .
In the medical process of E . . . set of three soft strips  compressive cuffs  is tied on the knees , lower thighs , upper thighs and hips of the patient .
This soft strip keeps inflating and deflating regularly .
During this entire process these strips by putting pressure on thighs and hips increase the diastolic coronary perfusion pressure because of which reduction comes in the pressure exerted on the heart .
E . . . Treatment process is very simple and easy .
This treatment is given to the patient only for an hour .
In total this process continues for 35 hours in 7 weeks .
The patient is neither made unconscious during this nor any kind of medicine is given to him .
During the entire process of E . . . The patient feels very easy .
In the immediate diagnosis of heart attack apart from E . . . And some special tests of blood at present a special type of camera is brought into use .
By this camera how much part of the heart has been damaged , this can be known .
The destroyed muscles of the heart may be diagnosed with the help of gamma camera .
According to the heart specialists , immediately after heart attack more damage occurs in the heart by the accumulation of blood clots in the coronary arteries .
The clot of blood if accumulates on the upper part of the artery then the heart attack becomes serious .
Because in the upper part of the arteries only the flow of blood is more .
On the accumulation of blood clot in the lower part or the last part of the artery the heart attack does not become serious .
Due to the reasons of the newest technique of medical science removal of blood clots now has become very easy .
In the decade of eighties two injections were developed by the American medical scientists to remove these clots which are called ` streptochynas ' and ` urochynas ' .
For the patients of heart these injections have proved to be a boon .
In the cardiac medical science this technique is known by the name of ` thrombocytic therapy ' .
But today for the diagnosis of the diseases of the heart newer techniques better than the other are available .
The myth that after heart attack life becomes worthless , useless and meaningless has changed now very fast .
After becoming alright the patient may join their work .
The malfunctioning in the muscles of the heart may also be made alright like other diseases .
Rehabilitation is very important for the patients of the heart .
The meaning of rehabilitation is to make the patient capable of working again , removal of mental tension and making him able to lead normal life .
Often after heart attack mental tension and fear start bothering the patient .
For leading a normal life it is important to remove such apprehensions .
There are three important stages of rehabilitation .
In the first stage it is important to remove the fear of becoming incapable or death from the mind of the patient .
Also with this any kind of pressure exerted on the heart is tried to remove .
This is that stage when the patient is made healthy mentally .
The initiation of making the patient disease free completely takes place in the second stage .
In this the person comes out of the bed and also starts climbing up some stairs gradually and at the end he comes back .
The complete effort of the doctor is this that once again the patient becomes a healthy and active citizen of the society .
In the third stage it is tried to make the patient physically and mentally completely healthy .
In the SAAOL natural medication keep the heart disease free .
Today the number of heart patients is increasing at a fast pace .
Medical science has also gone very far in this direction .
With techniques like angioplasty , bypass surgery the successful treatment of heart disease is possible .
But various research studies on the heart patients reveal that by taking slight precaution in one 's life pattern , style of living and food habits and by doing yoga and exercise the danger of many types of diseases may be averted .
the alternative of natural medication is beneficial .
the number of heart patients are increasing everyday .
People have to undergo expensive and risky surgeries .
At times one does not get much time between heart attack and heart fail that the patient may be saved depending on the doctor .
But bring such changes in the lifestyle that these types of complications do not come then it would be even better .
According to the verdict of Dr . Vimal Chhajed the director and the heart specialist of SAAOL heart center of Delhi the alternative of natural treatment is the most beneficial for the patients of heart .
After getting the important tests for coronary heart disease the advice for surgery is given to the patient .
Even after getting the surgery done the patients has to come to the hospital again after two - four years .
Even after such dangerous surgeries when the patient feels complications then the advice to consume the medicine by increasing its dose is given .
If the patient adopts the habit of staying continuously in neural and beautiful environment of nature and uses vegetarian food then the permanent diagnosis of these problems may happen .
Consume less oil and fat in food .
By doing yoga morning - evening , and doing sahaj exercise benefit is received .
Actually this is a natural treatment whose effect provides the body with the ability to make it free of all bodily diseases .
SAAOL that is , science and art of living , is a technique of treatment of heart based on natural treatment .
Under the SAAOL heart program the patents are not just given immediate relief but its permanent solution is done through natural medicine .
under the SAAOL natural treatment at first the importance of vegetarian food is told .
Then under SAAOL natural treatment habits of yoga in morning - evening and meditation etc are adopted .
In this treatment there is neither the need of eating medicine nor of getting surgery done .
Under this medication a training of three days is given to the heart patient .
The patients are kept in natural places away from the population .
During the training the habit of eating vegetarian food of less fat and to endure tension are taught .
Under this treatment along with yoga practice scientific information related to heart disease are also given .
That is , during this training the art of new balanced and natural life style is taught to the patient .
Balanced and fatless food and regular exercise become his daily routine .
Why is natural treatment esteemed ?
We have made even more than two and half thousand heart patients disease free with this natural treatment method .
In comparison to the availability of many types treatment methods and new medicines in modern medical technique the natural treatment method is more fruitful and beneficial .
After getting the treatment done through the natural treatment technique the patient becomes completely disease free .
The special thing with natural treatment technique is this that the person adopts such habit that other diseases do not ever cross his path .
Those people who after taking the training of natural treatment technique continue following its rules , the danger of heart problems can never occur to them .
Pimples of the head may make bald .
No matter in which part of the body the pimples develop , they are painful .
But if the pimples develop in the head then what can be said !
The pimples of the head , which in Ayurveda are called ` arunshika ' .
Due to pimples problems do occur but with this , situations of baldness , loss of memory , hair fall - hair greying , ill effects on the brain etc may also arise .
Pimples may arise in any organ of the body .
After the eruption of the pimples intense pain is felt when they rupture on becoming ripe .
The pimple of the ear even makes everyone restless .
The pimple of the ear does not let anyone sleep .
Arunshika meaning the pimple of the head also makes the patient restless .
On the eruption of arunshika there is intense itching on the head .
On getting arunshika itching intensifies at the time of writing - reading .
On getting arunshika there is more pain on itching .
Due to long hair the complete cleaning of the head does not take place .
Some women - men do not use soap on head .
According to their thought by applying the soap daily on the head the hair become gray .
Due to the deformity of arunshika there is high damage to the skin of the head .
Because of the occurrence of arunshika repeatedly there is damage to the hair of the head .
Due to the reason of arunshika the memory power weakens and the patient gets the habit of forgetfulness .
Because of the deformity of arunshika the head may also become bald with hair fall .
Because of the deformity of arunshika the black hair of women - men may become gray .
On not getting the treatment of arunshika done tiny worms are produced on the ripening of the pimples .
Because of the biting of the worms wounds are formed as well .
On the formation wounds intense pain occurs .
Due to the reason of long hair and not cleaning the hair lice are formed in the roots of the hair .
Due to the urine - faeces of lice deformity of arunshika occurs .
The lice suck blood from the scalp of the head .
Due to the sucking of blood by the lice the brain becomes weak .
Due to the biting of lice the person is not able to sleep properly at night .
Because of not taking full sleep the brain is affected harmfully .
The nature of the patient becomes ill - tempered .
The patient becomes angry at every matter .
Because of the consumption of food made with more chilli - spices and acidic juices acidity increases more in the body .
With much increase acidity there is increase in the bile of the body .
Because of the malfunctioning of the bile there is intense itching in the head .
On itching the head forcefully wounds appear in the head and the growth of arunshika starts .
According to experts of allopathy arunshika is a disease which spreads through lice .
Because of the biting and wastes of lice the deformity of arunshika with itching develops .
The lice which produce arunshika are called ` pedi culus capiris ' .
The deformity of arunshika happens due to the infection of pedi culus capiris .
In order to destroy the deformity of the pimples of the head hair must be cleaned properly .
For the cleanliness of the scalp long hair should be cut short .
On getting the hair cut with blade its treatment takes place easily .
After getting the hair cut the head should be washed morning - evening with water mixed with dettol .
If by any reason dettol is not available then the head should be cleaned by boiling neem leaves in water .
by applying neem oil not just the pimples are destroyed but the wounds growing out of itching also becomes alright .
Applying the neem bark paste on the blisters by grinding it with water the blisters rupture on getting mature quickly and do not occur again .
By applying a mask of leaves of neem , bark of blackberry and kattha  khadir  on head taking 10 - 10 grams , grinding it enough , mixed with cow urine , the complication of arunshika gets destroyed .
The solution of arunshika is done by consuming 7 ratti weight of sulphur chemical and 2 ratti weight of ruby water  one quantity  by licking morning - evening with honey .
Make and keep 10 portions of trifala powder 5 grams . gram ruby water and 2 grams pure sulphur by mixing them and grinding in grinder .
By consuming 1 . portion daily the complication of arunshika and itching gets destroyed .
After grinding the leaves of dhatura on the grinding stone and taking 100 grams of juice of the fresh leaves of dhatura and 200 grams of kalk leaves cook in 1 kilogram of mustard oil .
When the kalk juice gets burnt then keep it after filtering .
By applying this oil on head one gets rid of the complication of arunshika .
After consuming 15 to 20 grams of manjitharishth or khadirarishtha with equal quantity of water both times after dinner the complication of arunshika is also removed because of destruction of ringworm - itching and blood problems .
After taking and grinding trifala powder , neem bark , sandal , turmeric , daruhaldi and chirayta in equal proportion cook in mustard oil .
When everything gets burnt then after filtering this oil and applying two - three times on the head arunshika is soon destroyed .
Cook bitter torai , root of danti and chitrak mul in mustard oil after grinding for long .
By applying it 4 . times a day on arunshika there is immediate benefit .
The inflammation of arunshika too is removed .
Arunshika is removed by the use of karanj oil and eucalyptus oil .
By applying the juice of the leaves of dhatura on the blisters of arunshika two times a day after adding camphor the blisters are fast destroyed .
By applying madar milk on arunshika with cotton the blisters are soon destroyed and one gets rid of the burn and pain .
By consuming two pills of guggul in morning - evening with luke warm water ringworm - itching , blisters and pimples get destroyed .
Handicapness in itself is a curse , either it is of limbs or mental .
It is very difficult to estimate the physical suffering , helplessness , worthlessness , negligence etc . Occurring due to handicapness .
Only those can know this whose children have become victims of dangerous diseases like paralysis  polio  unknowingly .
It is the primary duty of every mother - father to get the child injected with the vaccine of polio in order to save from handicapness .
Out of six dangerous diseases occurring in childhood is polio which is called ' baal pakshaghaat ' in Ayurveda .
Those children who get this disease , their mother - father do not know anything related to this from the beginning .
Objectively : by knowing its initial form - symptom and by maintaining caution we can save the child from being polio infested .
Child polio disease at first infects the digestive system .
Its viruses reach the intestine by entering in the digestive system through the nose and mouth .
Staying in the intestine they continue to grow .
Then these viruses after getting mixed with blood damage the nerve cells of the vertebral column on reaching the central nervous system .
As a result to this the disease of polio appears .
Although the chance of reaching these viruses to the brain is just one percent .
But that same one percent becomes the reason of polio in child .
In Ayurveda it is called shaishawiya pakshawadha , baal pakshaaghaat or adharaang - waat .
This means the upper or lower part of the body becoming inactive or sensation less .
No work can be performed from the polio infested part .
There remains no voluntary control over that part .
Polio is a quick developing contagious disease .
Polio occurs due to three types of polio viruses .
Which are called polio myelitis type  polio myelitis virus type  1 . . .
In human species the disease of polio occurs due to the first and third type of the viruses .
The polio viruses do not die quickly .
Polio spreads from one person to the other .
After the infection through the medium of stool or else mouth , the discharge of nose it spreads quickly in intestine and throat .
The entry of polio in body is through several media , getting hurt , injection , through tonsil , during surgery etc .
It has been seen such that in the last stage of pregnancy in a pregnant woman the chance of its infection is high .
The easiest medium of its infection is - drinking water , food , milk , eating with dirty hands , surrounding dirt etc .
Not just this the virus of polio spreads from one patient to the other patient also through coughing , sneezing and phlegm .
The beginning of polio is similar to the symptoms of influenza .
The attack of the disease of polio is often sudden .
In the beginning the child may get mild fever , after this there may be paralysis in the patient .
The incubation period of the disease of polio is considered to be 3 to 12 days .
the symptoms of the disease generally appear according to the various conditions .
In the beginning of the disease fever , headache , pain in various body parts , cough - cold , digestive problems etc .
Able doctors also often fail to know that the child is about to contract polio .
After some days these symptoms are removed .
But after 7 . days the symptoms of polio appear .
The vertebral column gets stiffened due to the occurrence of fever , vomiting , dysentery , restlessness , pain , injury in the layer of the brain .
Because of the reason of polio the child has a lot of difficulty in bringing his knee to the mouth while sitting .
Because of the complication in urinary bladder the urine stops or comes out in less quantity accompanied with pain .
After two days even this symptom goes away .
The fever goes down but deformity comes in the legs and feet of child .
In 2 to 5 days of the beginning of his disease the symptom of paralysis start appearing in his legs and hands .
The polio diseases continues to increase for three days .
7 . days after the beginning of the polio disease the condition of the patient starts improving .
In paralysis the muscles of legs or arms get slackened .
Later on the muscles of these organs start drying up .
But the disease of some children even start reducing gradually .
On the disease not getting corrected the hands or feet or both the organs of the child become incapable of movement and locomotion .
As there is attack of polio on the child the affected organ becomes inactive , dried or lean - thin .
Due to the reason of polio the growth of the child stops .
The child becomes lethargic and the intelligence growth of the brain generally gets retarded or blocked .
Due to the reason of polio fingers along with hand - feet , joints , thighs , breast , waist area , vertebral column etc also get deformed .
When the disease gets old on not getting it timely treatment done then its extremely lethal effect falls on spinal nerves and vertebrae of the vertebral column .
For protection against it the dose and vaccine of polio are important .
In order to escape from this awful and dangerous disease giving dose of polio to child is important .
From the age of six months up to nine months of his age at the interval of one month each administer five doses to the child .
Get the first dose only of polio , second , third , fourth triple K . injection with polio and the fifth the dose of polio alone .
The first booster dose between one and half to two years of age and second booster dose between four and half to five years of age should be administered only once .
At present two types of polio vaccine are brought in use for the protection against this disease - salk vaccine and sabin vaccine .
The use of salk vaccine is done thrice in muscles through injection .
First injection in the quantity of 1 m . . six weeks after this second and the third injection is given after 7 to 9 months .
With this vaccine for around four years immune power develops against its virus .
In this vaccine all the three types of viruses stay mixed  diphtheria , tetanus and polio  .
The creation of sabin vaccine is also through three viruses .
There is the provision of making the use of sabin vaccine through mouth at the interval of every 1 month continuously for three months three times in total .
2 portions of 3 drops each of sabin vaccine is given empty stomach after mixing in khand with water or milk .
the immune power in sabin vaccine is maintained for around 8 years .
Thus by making use of the polio vaccine according to rules the child may be saved from being infested with polio .
According to Ayurveda the treatment of polio is done in two ways - internal treatment and external treatment .
In the internal treatment the use of powder , paste , aasaw , juice and burnt ashes are done .
While in the external treatment exercise , postures , oil massage , pack and swedan etc should be adopted .
There is benefit by massaging and fomentation on the polio infested organ .
For massage bala oil , mash oil should be used .
For locomotion arrangements may be done for hand vehicle or tricycle or special type of shoes .
Some beneficial tips for the disease of polio are of the following types .
By taking urad , pure kaunch and root of erand in equal proportion boil it in sixteen times of water .
Remove it on the remainder of quarter part water .
Then mix two pinches of clothfitered powder of asafoetida and aniseed into it and keep .
Taking 1 . spoon from it make the child drink 4 . times a day .
Make powder of everything pippalamul , chita mul , pippali , dry ginger and sea salt in equal quantity .
The total weight of all the powders should be 20 grams .
Then cook it on mild temperature after mixing 1500 m . . of urad soup and 500 m . . of sesame oil .
When only oil is left then filter it after removing .
Taking this oil in the quantity of 1 spoon make the child drink this after mixing in milk .
This oil may also be used for massage .
Massage this on the entire body of the child .
Make him lie for 15 - 20 minutes bare body in the morning sunlight .
This oil is also found in the Ayurvedic medical store with the name of ' maha mash tel ' .
Make use of mahayograj guggul up to 120 to 240 m . . with maharasnadi kwath 15 - 25 m . . morning - evening .
After this give 1 to 2 grams of rason pind with water .
In the affected area mahamash oil and vishgarbha oil  by mixing both in equal quantity  should be massaged twice daily .
No matter how much busy you are , it is important that you must take out time for physical exercise .
Go for walks in the morning and evening .
Stroll after meal at night .
If you are in the office , then climb through stairs instead of lift .
In every five minutes walk for five minutes .
By the way it is said that in a day one should certainly exercise for at least 30 minutes .
With this on one hand your blood circulation will stay normal , on the other hand your cholesterol etc will also not increase .
Keep an eye on eating - drinking .
If you want to stay healthy then for this the most important thing is your food - drinks .
If your fooding habit is not correct , then you may become victim of malnutrition , hypertension , anemia , blood sugar etc .
Say like this that your complete lifestyle gets affected with this .
Keep away from chaat - pakora or junk food .
Consume food materials containing iron compounds , calcium , magnesium , mineral and vitamin in high quantity .
With the consumption of fibrous fruits and vegetables many disease stay away on their own .
The extent to which the need of heart and body is important for men it is also for women .
The thread of life of man is tied to heart .
Till the time the heart stays healthy the life of man goes on smoothly .
Otherwise on the heart being disease infested he comes in the clutches of many types of heart related diseases .
Generally it is considered that the direct relation of heart diseases is with the increase in cholesterol .
As the quantity of cholesterol increases in body , the danger bell for heart gets rung .
But in modern experiments one such element has come to be known , which is considered to be far more lethal to the heart than the cholesterol .
This substance is - amino acid named homocystin which is four times more sticky substance than cholesterol .
This gets produced in the body during the process of digestion of food only without protein .
If its quantity gets increased in the body , then ill effects like blockage in the arteries , reduction in the work capacity of blood vessels have to be faced .
Apart from this because of the increase of homocystin alone many lethal effects have to be faced .
Like reduction in the capacity of blood clotting .
With increase in homocystin more production of bad cholesterol .
By repairing the DNA the work of homocystin stops .
Consequently , disturbance in the genetic construction of the person and the continuation of the disease of increased production of homocystin generation by generation .
On the occurrence of homocystin in pregnant woman abortion , premature delivery , less weight of the child , the feet of the child being joined , line in the middle of the lips etc . may occur .
The quantity of homocystin keeps increasing for the entire life time .
The quantity of homocystin at least becomes twice from childhood to old age .
The quantity of homocystin is more in comparison to women right from youth .
But the quantity of hommocystin gradually goes on decreasing with increasing age .
In fact the problem of increase of homocystin is found more in the age group of 20 - 30 years and is seen more in men .
In this also the percentage of Indians with this problem is more .
In the blood of man 5 - 15 MOL  L homocystin should be there .
If homocystin is found even 5 percent more in man then the chance of heart attack increases three times .
Because of increase in homocystin the chances of death increases 50 percent due to disease of heart and 20 percent due to brain and neural diseases .
Therefore those people who have a family history of heart disease , for then getting the homocystin test may prove to be blessing .
The reasons for increase of homocystin is obesity , diabetes , high blood pressure , smoking etc .
Apart from this consumption of more coffee and alcohol .
Less walking , increase in bad cholesterol in blood .
Not taking nutritious food , epilepsy , some medicines given for the treatment of sugar etc .
How should the quantity of homocystin be reduced ?
For reducing the quantity of homocystin at first it is essential to bring change in your life - style and eating habits .
Scientists have found out that the homocystin may be controlled by increasing the quantity of vitamin B . . - 12 and folic acid in food .
These vitamins are generally found in colored vegetables and fruits .
B . is found in tandoori chicken , tandoori fish , wheat , whole pulses , cabbage and in arhar dal etc .
Vitamin B - 12 is found in toned milk , toned cheese , tandoori fish and the white part of egg .
Folic acid may be obtained from green leafy vegetables , masoor , urad , lobia , lettuce , winter lentils , peas , cauliflower , cow milk etc .
Apart from this Vitamin B - 12 can also be obtained from curd , carrot , tomato , mint , lady 's finger , brinjal and gram .
Instead of panicking suddenly during any accident or emergency do first aid  first treatment  maintaining composure .
There is restlessness during the occurrence of heart attack .
On getting heart attack restlessness is felt to a great extent .
On getting heart attack there is piercing pain and contraction in the chest .
Due to heart attack pain spreads towards neck , back , left hand or jaw .
On getting heart attack it becomes difficult to breathe .
Due to heart attack the complaint of nausea , vomiting or extreme indigestion .
On getting heart attack excessive sweating attars without reason .
On getting heart attack giddiness and weakness is felt .
On getting heart attack do first aid .
Make the patient sit and ask him to stay calm .
Immediately inform the doctor treating the patient .
Contact the emergency ambulance service also along with it .
Find out whether the patient has got heart attack before .
Has the doctor given him any medicine earlier .
If yes then quickly give him that medicine .
This medicine is generally put below the tongue .
Within three minutes of giving the medicine the patient has to feel relieved .
If the pain is not becoming less then it means that the intensity of heart attack is more .
See whether the patient is taking breath at least .
If not then give artificial respiration .
On the occurrence of heart attack do not leave the patient alone .
On getting the heart attack do not give him anything to eat or during apart from the medicine .
Do first aid on getting burnt .
Keep the burnt portion under tap water .
If the burning is more then put the water of bucket on the burnt area .
Put on the fan for the burnt person , do not put blanket on the wound .
Cut the cloth near the burnt area , because if the cloth is synthetic then it will get stuck .
It is good for blisters to appear on the burnt area .
It becomes clear from it that the skin has not burnt deeply .
The blisters should never be made to rupture .
Do not put ghee or oil on the burnt area .
Do not put any dressing or bandage on the burnt area .
Do not give anything to eat or drink to the affected person .
The burnt person should be cautious against infection .
If the skin has burnt till greater depths then take him immediately to the doctor .
Also immediately take to the doctor if burnt with acid or any chemical .
Do not leave the burnt area uncovered , cover it with sterilised cloth .
On getting electric shock keeping your safety in mind at first switch off the main switch .
Then help the victim .
On getting electric shock the victim normally gets stuck to the electrical appliance .
In such situation firstly try to take the victim away from that appliance .
But keep in mind not to touch the victim directly , instead try to take him away with the help of any wood .
Do not pour water on victim  the person who has got the shock  .
If possible then try to put sand on the victim .
Once the victim is separated from the electrical appliance then check whether he is breathing or not .
Immediately contact the doctor on feeling any abnormality .
On getting firstly see that how deep is the cut .
If the cut is deep then immediately take to the doctor .
Do not clean deep wounds yourself .
If the wound is shallow then clean it with luke warm water .
Then after removing dirt clean with any antiseptic lotion and apply antibiotic cream .
Clean the wound from inside to outside .
Get the injection of tetanus etc on getting cut with iron nails etc .
Be cautious towards the infection of wound .
If there is need to tie bandage then tie the bandage , but be cautious that there should not be inconvenience on the wound .
If fever comes or bleeding does not stop due to wound , then take to the doctor .
Following symptoms may appear on the occurrence of fracture .
Swelling comes immediately after getting hurt .
On moving the hurt organ slightly also there is intense pain .
Do not move those organs at all hand - feet or wherever there is pain .
Keeping that organ in the usual condition take him to the doctor giving him support .
If after falling the person is not able to get up then do not compel him to stand , otherwise the situation may become worse .
If there is facility then get the x - ray done before going to the doctor .
Along with the fracture if there is wound or the pulse is not felt then take him to the doctor immediately .
Do not ever massage on the part affected with injury or fracture .
Do not try to straighten the injured part .
Continuously clean the area affected with the bite or sting of animals , so that the poison of the sting or saliva  spit  gets cleaned .
If there is swelling then give ice pack to the affected area .
On being injured do not do dressing and bandage yourself .
Do not give any medicine without the advice of the doctor .
On the occurrence of any domestic accident with the child you take the following precautions .
If something enters inside the ears of the child then do not try to take them out by your own self .
This way there may be a chance for it to go even more inside .
On the entrance of something in the ear of the child it would be better to take him to the doctor .
If something enters inside the nose then press the upper part of the nose or try to get him sneeze .
Do not let the suffering child lie .
On not coming out of the object gone inside the nose take the help of the doctor .
If something gets stuck in the throat then make the child inverted and on not coming out take the help of the doctor .
On asthma attack immediately use oxygen pump and take doctoral help .
In cancer it is fruitful like medicine - eating apple .
Scientists believe that cancer doest not only remove mild diseases but also cancer .
Scientists have compared anticancerous activities with the peel and pulp of the red apple .
They found out that the how much anti cancerous property is found in 1500 milligram of VitaminC that much property is found in 100 gram of fresh apple .
For patients and healthy people the way milk is beneficial , which can be drunk in any age in the same way is apple as well .
Apple is digestive qualities and does not produce acidity in stomach .
Apple is tempting to see and is excellent in taste .
Apple may be kept safe for long time .
From August to December apple does not get rotten at all .
Eat apple and become strong and able .
Apple is the best nutritious fruit to make weak thin body fat , fresh and radiant .
Phosphorus and iron elements are found in abundant quantity in apple .
Apple makes the intelligence sharp and body strong .
Apple gives energy to the heart and makes it healthy and strong .
Apple is easily digestible , content giver , very dear to heart , enhancer of brain power and circulator of fresh blood in the body .
Apple removes the shun able weakness in diseases like that of blood , bile , intestine , cough and cleansing .
The most important property of apple is its being rich in life energy .
With its this special power apple accumulates oxygen in the body .
Apple has miraculous effect in many diseases especially those generated by cough phlegm problem .
The use of apple is to give power to heart , brain , liver and intestine .
Because of being rich in vitamin B etc nutritive substances it is the one to make the body strong and shapely .
By consuming an apple a day  with peel  the body becomes healthy - wealthy , swift and powerful .
The pregnant women , children , patients and aged should eat an apple per day .
For making the brain powerful every day an apple should be eaten around one hour before meal .
This experiment should be continued for 15 - 20 days .
In stomach diseases those who have indigestion , appetite is less , because of acidity there is burning in the chest those should not consume fried things in the breakfast .
One big apple should be eaten every day .
Those people who are bothered with headache or are suffering from headache for long , may get rid of this disease .
In dry cough by eating two apples every day for one or two weeks one gets relief .
Greek doctors have considered apple to be the one which gives strength to the heart .
Definitely the apple gives strength to the heart because of fructose and VitaminC .
By taking 50 gram apple jam , with 2 silver foil in the morning the heart beat of the person is maintained uninterrupted .
Also with this one can be saved from the restlessness produced due to fast heart rate .
For the patients of constipation apple is a very useful fruit .
The patients of constipation should eat one ripe red apple morning - evening .
On getting worms in the stomach by continuing eating apple before going to bed in 10 - 15 days the worms come out with stool .
Do not drink water after eating apple .
The people suffering from amnesia should eat apple jam in the morning and an apple in the evening .
By this use of apple the disease of amnesia is removed .
For patients of high blood pressure also eating apple is beneficial .
those people who have the complaint of stone , it is beneficial to drink apple juice morning - evening for them .
By the use of juice of apple morning - evening the stone after dissolving comes out of the urinary tract .
By the use of the juice of apple the formation of stone stops .
By the use of apple juice there is relief in the pain of kidney and the burn and blockage of urine is also removed .
By consuming apple juice after adding sea salt vomiting stops .
AS the teeth grow out in children and they start eating things by nibbling , start feeding them apples .
By nibbling apple the juice gets stuck to teeth and gums which gives benefit to the teeth .
By eating two ripe apples by chewing in the morning without peeling the anger gets cooled .
Eat apple continuously for 15 days then surprising change comes in the behavior of angry people .
In women generally there occurs the deficiency of blood because of which they get the feeling of weakness and tiredness .
Such women should eat one apple everyday in the morning .
Apple is good for health and beauty .
The secret of pink cheeks is the consumption of apple .
Jam acts as medicine in heart disease .
For those who are reducing mental tension and doing mental labor it is good to consume apple jam .
Apple acts like medicine in diarrhoea and peptic ulcer .
The flower of apple is used in depression , sleeplessness , headache and the medicine of the children .
The apples must be washed before eating because pesticides are spread over these .
Therefore by washing these fruits the poisonous effect would vanish .
People consider this that eggs , meat , butter and cheese are natural and essential food materials but fruit is insignificant .
At times it is important to understand to stop children from eating fruit so that their stomach does not get upset .
With the ghee of cow milk there is enhancement in memory power .
In unconsciousness the gulp of ghee  one or two  is beneficial .
On the rupturing of nose blister the use of the ghee of cow milk is beneficial .
The blood will stop flowing by dropping two drops of melted ghee of cow milk in both the nares of the nose .
In extreme cold walk may prove to be dangerous for the heart patients .
Instead of bending forward and exercising by sitting on feet it is better that you keep doing your chores and keep moving your hands - feet .
Sometimes go for swimming as well .
Get the check up done at intervals .
After the age of 30 - 35 years it is important for every person to get proper check up done in six - eight months .
Some symptoms are such by which you can easily know that now it is essential to go to the doctor - like with left arm there is pain in your chest , you are feeling something like tumor in your breasts , feeling of excessive tiredness , staying in tension or more fits of anger has started coming .
If you have sugar then regularly you should get blood pressure check up , ECG and also urine test done .
If there is any problem of heart , then never let your weight increase .
Take all the medicines regularly .
During the entire check up do not ignore the check up of teeth , because if once the teeth start decaying , then your entire happiness and peace , would end .
Go to the dentist every six months and change your brush every three months .
After 40 years get mammography done after every one - two years , because in this age there is chance of breast cancer .
It is important to get blood pressure checked up in every two years .
It is important to take the injection of diphtheria - tetanus in every ten years .
After 65 years the risk of pneumonia lurks , then get its regular check up done also .
If you are pregnant , then take it for sure that many changes are about to come in your body .
Talk about this with your near relatives , friends .
Take balanced diet and drink lots of water .
Also do swimming , by this the muscles stay strong .
keep away from all types of addictions .
Do not take any medicine without consulting the doctor .
Think about your prospective child , talk to him sweetly .
Listen to good music .
As far as possible stay cheerful .
Generally we have the complaint of forgetting every thing and not being able to concentrate in work .
Play puzzles , cross word , card or word games in order to sharpen your brain .
By these games you brain cells will become strengthened and your mental ability would increase by 20 to 30 percent .
So did you see how easy is the oath to stay fit , it is important only to make mind .
If there are dark circles under your eyes , then understand that there is deficiency in your eating - drinking , you are anaemic or you are not taking proper sleep , you have the complaint of constipation or perhaps you stay in a lot of tension .
To escape from this you should take balanced diet .
Take at least eight hours of sleep in the entire day .
Drink 8 - 10 glasses of water .
Soak four - five pods of almond in milk .
In the morning grind that with the same milk and put it around the eyes .
Wash it on drying .
Apart from this mix little bit of potato juice , one spoon curd and cucumber juice .
Add some drops of almond oil in it , then it will be even better .
Now rub this mixture around the eyes .
By doing this regularly you can get rid of dark circles to great extent .
On hearing the name of cancer a terror like situation arises , do we have this disease or not .
It is true to get scared , because it is said about women that they are ' symptom free ' that is they get the sense of the disease late .
Even if it occurs then on account of home and domestic work they postpone going to the doctor .
When they reach , then it becomes very late .
In India the cancer of uterus occurs more in comparison to breast cancer , but in metropolitans breast cancer is found more .
Figures tell that last year eighty thousand women got affected with breast cancer , out of which thirty five thousand became the victim of death .
The cancer of reproductive organs in women .
There are two parts of uterus - the first is entire uterus , second the cervix .
In our country India out of all the cancer diseases occurring in women 40 percent cancer are of cervix .
The cancer of uterus occurs less .
In women there is more chance of the occurrence of the cancer of uterus opening .
Uterus or womb is a hollow organ of pear shape , which is located in the posterior part of the women 's body between urinary bladder and anus .
The lower or the narrow part of this uterus is called cervix .
Cervix opens into the genital of the woman , which goes to the outer part of the body .
This cancer is generally found more in the following situations - who have many children , who have got abortion done many times , who are not cautious about cleanliness , who have many sexual partners or who have got married in young age .
Symptoms - irregular menstruation , bleeding after the cessation of period , bleeding after intercourse , discharge of foul smelling dirty water .
If the detection of cancer happens in time , then its treatment is done easily , therefore get the check up done regularly .
This cancer though occurs in the age of fifty - six , but now this disease has also started occurring in young age .
On detection at the right time it becomes alright 90 percent .
Therefore every woman should want that they get the pap smear test from the age of forty years .
If during the test any problem is visible , then its treatment may happen .
It takes five to seven years for this cancer to grow .
In the initial stage this disease stays painless .
Its cure is surgery and radiotherapy .
In the first and second stage the doctor can do any of the two treatments , but in third and fourth stage only radiotherapy happens .
In the surgery the uterus is entirely removed .
In the first stage there is chance of being healthy 90 percent .
In the second stage 75 percent and 50 percent in the third stage .
Though breast cancer is seen in women of more than 40 years , but in the age of 30 years also it may happen .
Often breast cancer occurs in such women more , whose marriage has taken place late , whose children have been born late or have not been born , whose periods have started early and menopause occurs late , those who have not done breast feeding to the child , doing consumption of alcohol and smoke or breast cancer has happened any among mother , sister , aunt .
Symptoms - swelling near the armpits , change of the color of breast , inward sucking of nipples , change in the shape of the breast , occurrence of tumor in breast .
The treatment of breast cancer happens with surgery , chemotherapy and radiotherapy .
The surgery is of two types .
First that in which some part of the breast only is removed as per need .
This is called conservative surgery .
This is possible only in the first and second stage .
The need of chemotherapy arises in 80 percent women .
In the first stage the success of surgery is 85 percent .
In the second stage 60 percent , 45 percent in the third stage and 15 percent in the fourth stage .
Therefore it is important that the disease is diagnosed in the first stage only .
Deep , comfortable and sufficient time of sleep rejuvenate the body or makes the body young again .
The damage which occurs in tissues , the deficiency that comes in energy , all that is again fulfilled during sleep .
In such case if one does not get enough sleep , then problems like pain in the hands - feet , dark circles around the eyes , headache start from the very next day .
For proper sleep it is also important that your bed is comfortable , one gets enough sleep to change sides and with less disturbance at least eight hours of sleep is got .
How to take care of the skin ?
After an age moisture starts getting lost from the skin .
For this it is important that you drink at least eight glasses of water in the entire day .
Not just that in sun also you should protect your skin .
Staying in sun for more than ten minutes could be dangerous .
Long menstruation or onset of menstruation at any time , more menstrual flow or menstrual flow for long duration is also a disease .
Apart from the menstrual flow the discharge coming out of the genital path is called leukoria or white discharge .
Its symptoms are the following - increase in weakness , giddiness , loss of appetite , pain in hands , feet , back , stomach , waist etc while sitting or rising .
sometimes this discharge becomes wound on increasing and foul smell also starts coming out of it .
Because of this reason there is itching around the vagina and the quantity of calcium starts decreasing in the body .
For this the chief medicines are pushyanug powder , triwang bhasm , kaamdugha juice , moenorrhagia preventing pearl rich juice , ladhrasaw , leukesil etc .
During menstruation the mind - body does become little uneasy , but many times these days the complications also increase .
Though rainy season is considered to be a good season , but it is also the reason of many diseases .
The humidity and temperature of this weather is helpful in the growth of organisms and insects .
This is the reason that in monsoon indigestion , allergy , dysentery , cough , cold , eye infections etc diseases occur .
On drinking polluted water also diseases occur in which typhoid , cholera , jaundice , amoebiasis are very common .
These days at every place there are heaps of garbage and the water also continues to get accumulated which is the suitable place for the breeding of mosquitoes , flies , cockroaches etc .
Many types of diseases start spreading through these .
From mosquitoes malaria , dengue etc spread .
The cockroaches pollute the food materials by reaching in the kitchen , due to these diseases of stomach happen .
In monsoon the cold or stale food may also be harmful for health , because in them fungus and bacteria start growing which make the food poisonous .
In this season stale food should not be eaten .
In rainy season only the respiratory diseases also occur more .
Allergic sinitis , bronchitis , asthma or pneumonia may occur in young children .
Skin diseases also trouble a lot in rainy season ringworm , scabies , itching occur more in these days only .
The diseases occurring in rainy season .
Dysentery with blood - due to the consumption of polluted and contaminated water in rainy season and due to the weakness of stomach pain and spasm happen .
In order to remove this disease take poppy seed , dry ginger powder and candy sugar in equal quantity and make powder by breaking - grinding .
Take this mixture one spoon each at the interval of every 3 hours .
By consuming three - four times a day with one cup water which has been boiled and cooled mucus , dysentery with blood and spasm and pain in stomach get stopped .
Till the time of benefit do not consume fried things , heavy things , hot tea , hot milk and salty substances .
The immune power to bear those matter and environment are not there in the body , due to the effect of that matter or environment there is reaction in the body and it is called allergy .
In rainy season due to the allergy because of polluted environment and substances in some people breathing or respiratory diseases occur .
To avoid this complication equal quantity of mulhathi and fine powder of turmeric should be mixed and half spoon should be taken with warm water two three times in a day .
By this method one gets riddance from disease like cold , respiratory diseases , dry cough etc and immune power develops in the body .
Because of contamination of water in this season dysentery , vomiting appear separately or even together .
ANM bahanji had also said it that if the child faces difficulty in drinking mother 's milk or his breathing becomes fast then it would have to be taken to the hospital immediately .
Radha knows that there is complete nutrition in the milk of the mother .
Therefore for complete four months she fed Muniya with her own milk .
ORS , glucose or not even water , no matter how much hot or cold it had been .
In the initial days do not bathe the child only wipe with cloth .
Up to four months do not give anything other than mother 's milk .
Definitely take the weight of the child .
If the child has problem in drinking water or the breathing is fast then immediately take it to big hospital .
Exactly one and half months after birth Radha took Muniya to get the vaccine injected .
Behanji said that vaccine and doses save from six polio like diseases , therefore in getting the entire vaccine there should not be mistake .
Exactly after one month Muniya received vaccine and dose again .
And one month after it , the third time .
Every vaccine was registered in the mother - child protection card and every time behanji reminded Radha of coming the next time for the vaccines .
Behanji also told Radha that she should not forget at all the vaccine of diphtheria that would be put in the ninth month of Muniya .
Because of if the vaccine is not given to the child and if diphtheria occurs then after that diseases like dysentery , pneumonia , malnutrition and sarsaam etc .
But on the completion of ninth month Muniya got the vaccine of diphtheria and with it she also received the drops of vitamin A to save from night blindness .
She will continue getting the dose of vitamin A every six month up to three years .
This you should also remember that on the decided dates you must get the vaccine - dose given .
Every time get the protection card filled .
Do not forget the vaccine of diphtheria on the completion of ninth month .
Give the drops of vitamin A up to three years .
Radha had fed Muniya with her own milk from the first month her birth and up to four months she had not given her anything apart from her milk .
Every month Radha had to take the weight of Muniya .
On sixth month the weight of Muniya was twice from that at birth .
Radha became happy that the weight of Muniya had increased correctly according to the saying of A . . . behanji .
Then three - four times a day Radha started feeding Muniya half bowl of mashed chapatti , dal and vegetables .
And with it Radha also used to give green leafy vegetables , papaya and gourd so that night blindness does not occur to Muniya .
Now Muniya is of one year , today is her birthday .
Now her weight is three times of that at birth .
Every body at home are happy that nurturing of Muniya is happening in the correct manner .
Now Radha feeds Muniya half bowl of food even five - six times in a day .
You all should also remember that in six months the weight should be doubled .
To the child of four to twelve months half bowl of food must be fed three - four times a day .
The weight should be three times on the completion of one year .
From twelve to eighteen months feed half bowl food five - six times a day .
One day Muniya started getting loose motion .
Radha became worried , she remembered the saying of A . . . behanji that because of repeated dysentery the water of the body and the salts come out and there may even be danger to his life .
Immediately as per told by bahanji Radha started giving liquid items found in the house repeatedly to Muniya .
Like the water of dal , starch water of rice , lemonade or light tea .
But together with these things behanji had also asked to give O . . . but that there was no O . . . at home .
Sohan brought O . . . packet from anganwari .
Radha made O . . . solution according to the process told by A . . . bahanji .
And made Muniya drink after every dysentery .
Next day Radha threw the leftover solution and made fresh solution .
Apart from this she also continued feeding complete meal to Muniya .
In two - three days the dysentery stopped on its own and Muniya became alright .
Everyone should remember it always that as dysentery starts in child , keep giving domestic liquid things after every dysentery .
Deficiency of water in body is very dangerous , therefore keep giving O . . . solution as well .
At least give half bowl of food four - five times in a day certainly and even after this there is dysentery then take her to health center .
The treatment of cough - cold may be done even in the house .
Therefore on contracting cold Radha treated Muniya this way .
By making her drink tulsi tea , and mixing ginger juice and lemon juice in honey .
By giving more and more things to drink and by feeding regularly .
Muniya became alright in three - four days .
But Radha thought if her condition would have become worse even after doing everything .
Bahanji counselled that the meaning of such happening is pneumonia and there are three symptoms to recognize it stopping of food - drinks , fast breathing and rib movement .
In such situation take the child to bahanji immediately and get her administered the medicine of pneumonia .
If bahanji tells then immediately go to big hospital and get her checked up .
If due to any reason you do not find bahanji then also take the child to big hospital immediately .
Muniya did not even become of one year that mother - in - law started expressing the desire for a grandson .
Radha asked bahanji , she said that it will take two to three years for the weakness that has come in the body after the birth of Muniya to go away .
As such if there is pregnancy then there may be problem as well as complication and the prospective child may also stay weak .
Also Muniya will stop getting mother 's milk and her care will also not be taken .
Radha understood , the meaning of more and frequent children is disease in the destiny of child , malnutrition and twelve months of money crunch .
Bahanji told easy and reliable ways of contraception .
After discussion Sohan and Radha chose the right way and decided that for three years they would not produce second child .
You should also remember that there should be a gap of three years between two children .
Conception before three years is bad for the health of mother and child .
For keeping gap between two children use condom , pills or copper . .
On stopping the these methods second child may be given birth to .
One day some people did a counsel after coming to the village , Radha and Sohan also went , the discussion happened regarding the stopping of disease through hygiene .
After toilet putting soil or ash over it .
After washing the hands properly only feeding the child and using clean water .
To protect food from dirt and flies .
Burning the garbage of the household or burying it in the ground .
Not letting water accumulate near well or hand pump .
Through all these things the prevention of diseases may happen to a great extent .
Everybody liked the talks and with the help of institution and panchayat people completed these together .
Sohan and Radha in fact even swore to ward off dirt and disease .
After some days the result also came in front , as dirt lessened the diseases too started reducing .
Diabetes has taken the form of an epidemic in the world and its various kinds of social and financial adverse effects are also coming forward .
In the patients of diabetes diabetes foot is an extremely serious problem .
Do you know that in the world every year the foot of 10 lakh patients has to be amputated because of diabetes foot ?
Thus in the whole world in every 30 seconds surgery of amputating the foot of a certain patient afflicted with diabetes foot takes place .
My intention of telling you these figures is not to frighten you , but to caution you .
By researches done in this regard it has been proved that by good care it is possible to escape from the problem of diabetes foot to great extent .
Hence it is necessary that patients of diabetes should know this well what effect of this disease can occur on feet and how the care of feet should be taken .
The ancient proverb of Prevention is better than cure is absolutely successful in diabetes disease .
There is a chance of occurrence of ulcer in feet to the patients of diabetes due to the following two reasons .
In the patients of diabetes because of damage occurring in the nervous system there is decline in capability to feel in their feet and they do not feel pain at all due to which wound or injury in feet does not get detected in time .
In patients of diabetes because of flaccid blood circulation wounds or injuries heal late and on occurrence of a small wound danger of infection keeps lurking .
Such people whose blood level is high can suffer from diabetes foot .
Hence if you are ever told such that you have diabetes or there is a likelihood of occurrence of diabetes then you should definitely save your feet from getting hurt and you should also take proper care of them .
In patients of diabetes the likelihood of diabetes foot increases if you have diabetes neuropathy .
If blood circulation is flaccid in your feet .
If there is a deformity in your feet , like there is corn or hammer-toe in feet .
If you wear shoes of wrong shape or design .
If you are afflicted with uncontrolled blood sugar .
If you smoke beedi-cigarette , drink alcohol or your cholesterol level stays high .
If because of diabetes there has been ulcer in your feet ever before .
If because of diabetes you have disease of kidneys , heart or eyes .
The main causes of diabetes foot  ulcer and infection in feet  are .
Due to bite of wrong sized or new shoes .
Wounds in feet like wounds occurred unknowingly by shoe bite or by walking barefoot those which patient is unable to detect .
Blisters occurred by burning  like because of bath by extremely hot water , bottle of hot water , heat radiator , etc .  .
Infection of corn plaster and nails .
Wound occurred by continuously staying in bed of patient  bed blisters  .
Deformity in feet like kinak , clawed nail , corn , etc .
Care of diabetic patient and feet .
In preventing diabetes the role of the patient himself is most important .
Patients should examine their feet everyday on a regular basis .
Patients should look at the upper and lower parts of their feet attentively everyday .
Patients should also examine the parts between their fingers and parts near the ankle close to heel regularly .
Patients should keep in mind if there is no wound , cut or pain anywhere while examining their feet regularly .
If there is no crack or cut in the skin of feet of patient .
If the skin of feet of patient is not dry or soft .
If there is no swelling in one foot or leg of the patient .
If there is no formation of warts or kinak in feet of patients .
Change in the nails growing on the inner side of fingers like nails getting thick or colourless is a sign of diabetes foot .
Occurrence of blisters on skin is also a sign of diabetes foot .
Occurrence of hot  cold spots on skin is a sign of diabetes foot .
To prevent diabetes foot keep an eye on changes in blood circulation .
Keep an eye on color of fingers also .
By your sitting on chair etc . on hanging your legs if color of fingers of your feet starts becoming red , pink or purple then blood circulation in your feet is not right .
Do not be indifferent to pain in feet .
If at night or by walking little you start feeling pain in legs then understand that blood circulation in a certain vessel is blocked .
If there is a problem in your nails like hard nail then cut your nails carefully or get help from a professional .
Do not cut your nails quite deep rather cut straight .
If nails are left pointed then file them .
If you are troubled by corn or warts then never cut corn or warts yourself .
Do not use corn pad also because skin burns by this and can take form of an ulcer .
Safe cure for wart or kinak is only that you should consult a therapist .
Everyday in the morning and before sleeping wash your feet with lukewarm water and use a moderate soap .
Before washing your feet kindly ensure that water is not extremely hot .
Wipe your feet with a soft towel of a light color and wipe between your fingers carefully so that skin there does not get scraped by rubbing .
After wiping your feet examine your feet carefully if there are no signs of blood of pus on it .
If you find signs of blood or pus then consult a therapist quickly .
After wiping apply talcum powder between feet and fingers so that there remains no wetness .
If because of a certain reason you have to keep your feet in water then do not keep for more than 2-3 minutes because by being in water for a long time skin of feet becomes extremely soft .
Foot spa ' may prove harmful for patients of diabetes especially who have disease related to neuropathy or pulse .
If your feet are getting dry then apply a cream so that there are no cracks .
Do not apply cream between fingers .
If feet are too dry then use cream twice a day .
Make a selection of your cream only on consulting a therapist because for extremely dry feet special cream , containing urea , is available .
Be careful that inside the house pointed things like needle , insulin syringe or pin etc . do not remain lying on the floor .
Patients of diabetes should not walk barefoot .
By walking barefoot there surely stays a chance of getting injured rather extreme pressure is also exerted on feet due to absence of support from shoes .
Wear thick socks , and shoes should also be comfortable and of appropriate size .
Examine your shoes and socks from time to time and before wearing shake it from top to bottom so that if there is a pointed thing , etc . it should come out .
Be careful that feet do not come in direct contact with things like bar heater or bottle of hot water because skin may burn by it .
To keep skin warm wear thick socks .
Once a year definitely get your feet examined by specialists of foot care  podiatrist  .
Patients of diabetes should maintain special caution about shoes .
Often chance of occurrence of ulcer increases by wearing new shoes .
If you buy new shoes then first see them wearing in the house for 20-30 minutes .
If shoes bite some part of your foot or exert extreme pressure then get the cobbler to loosen the shoe a bit else buy new shoes .
Never stay wearing a new shoe for the whole day .
It will be better that you take the shoes to the podiatrist .
Do not wear open slippers or sandals and do not wear shoes without socks .
Wear leather or vinyl-mesh mix shoes .
Shoes should be broad and open so that feet fit in properly .
Shoes should be of round toes .
The part that supports the heel of the shoe should be tough so that it does not become flat .
Tie the leather straps properly or wear the shoes by means of Velcro so that feet stay in a comfortable position .
The sole of shoes should be flexible and about 1 cm thick .
The interior of the shoes should be soft .
While buying shoes putting hand in the shoes check if the interior of the shoes is not rough .
Buy new shoes after noon because feet swell during the day .
Often shoes bought in the morning do not fit in the evening .
Prior to buying shoes in the evening take a measure of your foot on a cardboard thereafter buy new shoes on the basis of its measure .
It is said that ' to delay is better than an accident ' but by delaying in case of diabetes foot an accident may occur .
Therefore from today rather from now itself start taking care of your feet in the right manner because the best cure for diabetes is its prevention only .
Even then if the symptoms of diabetes foot are visible to the patient of diabetes in his feet then without delaying consult your therapist immediately .
Diabetes has taken the shape of an epidemic in the world today .
In India the number of patients of diabetes is more than in all the countries in the world .
Today approximately 4 crore people are afflicted with diabetes in India and by 2030 there is a likelihood of this number reaching to 7 . crores .
The main cause of disease of diabetes is a comfortable lifestyle , obesity and excess in population of old people .
Therefore we get to see the number of patients of diabetes more in cities as compared to villages .
There is an estimate that 30 % patients living in metropolitan cities do not know that they have come into the clutches of diabetes disease .
Comparatively with the Southern countries Indians are becoming prey to diabetes in youth itself .
Because of which there is a great harm to the economy also .
Diabetes is of two types , Type-I and Type-II , but in India 95 % patients are of Type-II only and only 5 % patients are found to be of Type-I .
During the past years number of Type-II patients is increasing continuously .
In the condition before occurrence of diabetes  pre-diabetic  on examining blood on an empty stomach level of glucose increases and ' glucose tolerance ' becomes abnormal .
It is that condition when glucose in blood is more than normal but person can not be called a diabetes patient yet .
From ' pre-diabetic ' patients 5 - 10 % people come into category of diabetes each year .
This is a good news that prevention of diabetes is possible .
Along with change in lifestyle prevention of diabetes is possible by proper use of medicine .
Researches tell that healthy diet  less calorie , less fat-acidic and fiber in abundance  and through regular exercise  everyday 30 minutes and 5-7 times in a week  diabetes can be reduced by 50 % in people of abnormal glucose tolerance .
By giving medicines like metformin , acrabase and glitazones 30-60 % reduction can be brought in cases of diabetes in people of abnormal glucose tolerance .
In diabetes life threatening , large and minute complications can be born in the vessels .
To prevent these complications aid of heart vessel and pancreas transplant and laser photocoagulation can be taken .
Due to these chances of occurrence of blindness , disfigurement and premature death can be there .
Diabetes of pregnancy can prove to be harmful for mother and child both .
The complications of diabetes can be stopped from increasing .
It has been proven from both studies ` Diabetes control and complications trial '  in category-I diabetes  and United Kingdom Prospective  Category - II diabetes  that it is possible to prevent minute vessel complications by intensive glucose control nevertheless through intensive glucose control controlling large vessel complications is not that significant .
Through blood pressure control , intensive lipid management and anti-platelet therapy these complications can be reduced in a significant manner .
These complications can be stopped in a significant manner by keeping a strict control on all these abnormal processes and expense that is incurred on the patient is also less .
Cure of diabetes and related complications is expensive .
An expense of about Rs . 5000 can come every year on the treatment of a patient .
Cure can be more expensive if complications of patient increase else he has to be admitted to the hospital .
There is an expense of more than Rs . 20,000 crore on the therapy of Indian diabetes patients .
A strict control on the glucose level of diabetes patient is difficult because the danger of occurrence of hypoglycemia in them can increase by it .
By new medicines like insulin analog , inhaled insulin , peptide-I  exenatide  like glucagon , meglitinide derivative , DPP-IV inhibitors control of level of glucose can be done without the danger of hypoglycemia .
Despite of being acquainted with advantages of strict control on glucose , blood pressure control and lipid control only 30-40 % patients are able to have this control and out of these also only 10 % patients are able to have control over all of these .
It is necessary to spread information about researches that happen on diabetes and control related cures on a massive level .
If diabetes and its complications are not stopped from taking a dreadful form then in a developing country like India catastrophic circumstances can originate .
Here even today we can not control the pathologies and mortality rate due to infectious diseases and prenatal diseases .
For this we will have to bring changes in lifestyle of common man .
We will have to examine people who have more danger of occurrence of diabetes , we will have to take more care of pre-diabetic patients , we will have to control the glucose level and we will have to control the blood pressure and lipid of diabetic patients .
Although doing this is extremely difficult but it is necessary to achieve these goals .
Seeing the large number of patients of diabetes it will not be inappropriate to call India a diabetes capital .
Currently number of diabetes patients in India is about 370 lakh .
There is a chance of this number increasing to become about 860 lakh in 2030 .
There are a number of reasons behind cases of diabetes increasing suddenly in India .
Having congenital reasons , having much weight , imitation of western lifestyle , sensitivity , stomach fat and insulin resistance  with less weight  .
Diabetes can affect various body parts .
Nervous system , eyes , kidneys , bones , etc . also have not escaped this epidemic .
By diabetes disorders can occur in bones , joints and muscles and nerves .
Because of which stiffness in joints - swelling , ulcers in feet , decaying of feet else feet can become dark .
If proper control is not kept over diabetes then bone related diseases can occur .
If an elderly woman is afflicted with category . diabetes then danger of bone breaking increases by it .
If bone breaks then it takes a long time for it to join .
In addition to this bones become basically weak because due to deficiency in insulin developmental process of bones stops .
This does not happen in category - II diabetes afflicted as most of the patients of this category are fat as a result of which their bones are also big and strong .
Hence patients of category . require an average of 1200 mg Calcium and 400 to 600 units ' vitamin . ' everyday .
Dose of osteoporosis is necessary for patients of category -1 like common patients .
According to an interesting research if baby is given ' vitamin . ' then danger of occurrence of category . diabetes reduces .
There is more chance of occurrence of infection to patients of diabetes .
Various deformities and mortality rate can increase in patients due to infection .
There can be various reasons for its basis .
Immunity reducing , nerves of body or nervous system getting affected negatively , glucose level increasing in skin .
The level of amount of glucose in skin exceeding 150 , danger of bone infection increases .
Hence controlled amount of glucose is necessary in surgeries related to bones like joint transplant and treatments like joining or setting a broken bone .
If level of glycosylated hemoglobin increases by 2 % then by that danger of occurrence of abscess or ulcer increases by 1 . % and danger of amputating a body part increases by 1 . % .
Here it is reasonable to discuss the topic of diabetes and infection of feet because it is found so in most cases .
Due to the reason that sensory nerves get damaged , the feeling of hot and cold and injury in feet gets reduced and feet get continually damaged .
By damage of nerves that are manager of muscles there can be paralysis in feet , feet can become deformed or twisted .
By exertion of more pressure on less space chance of formation of ulcer increases .
In this manner by damage of nerves that control the temperature of skin , skin gets worse .
Because of blockage in the blood circulation of feet proper nutrition is unable to reach the feet and less white blood cells reach there .
Some white cells that reach get damaged because of diabetes since these cells save the body from infection .
Hence immunity becomes less .
Bone diseases occurring due to diabetes are in this manner .
Weakening of bones , change coming in the walk ,  balance of body is not maintained by blockage of nerves  occurrence of decrease in immunity , wound not filling up fast , getting an infection again and again from wound not healing and consequently from these diseases starting from handicap of patient even death can occur .
Because of diabetes infection of feet begins from the soles of feet .
In the beginning there is a redness in skin which remains even after pressing .
Skin gets tough .
There can be formation of ulcer by injury in foot that reaches the muscles and bones and pus can develop in foot , fingers can degenerate or darken .
You should cure patient immediately , surgery and amputation of foot are also combined in the treatment .
Infection of foot because of diabetes is a state of emergency .
It is necessary to do the amputation of foot in 80 % of the cases and treatment of patient on admitting in hospital in 20 % of the cases .
In Indian patients cause of 12 % cases of ulcer in feet is diabetes .
There is influence on joints because of diabetes .
Disease named ` Charcot joint ` can occur to 1 out of 600 patients of patients afflicted with diabetes .
The difference between infection and Charcot is this that in Charcot feet of patients are red , swollen , and twisted and patient does not have any pain in it and patient does not have fever .
A specific kind of test might be necessary to detect ` Charcot joint ` .
Aid of diabetes control  glucose control in blood  , plaster of a specific shape , shoes and surgery can be taken in the treatment .
Because of diabetes bones become weak and so they can break soon .
Specific caution is required during treatment because there remains a chance of the body part degenerating in the plaster .
Danger of infection during surgery can also increase because of diabetes .
It takes time for the bone to join in diabetes .
As a result of the bone breaking often deformity can occur in joints also .
Flexibility of joints ends by accumulation of glucose in joints , with this deformity can arise in skin of joints and bone fibers , consequently stiffness can occur in joints .
Skin of hands of patients of diabetes becomes thick , stiff like wax and dried up .
Fingers of hands stiffen and snap on bending .
This is also called ' trigger finger ' .
The whole hand on some patients gets twisted then distortion comes in forefinger of some patients which is known by the name of ' dupuytren ' .
Because of these difficulties patients can not even perform the action of namaskar properly .
Aid of exercise , injection of steroid in nerves and hands and surgery is taken for treatment .
Normally shoulders of both arms get jammed else stiffness occurs in them because of which patients can not even comb their hair .
Patients become unsuccessful in rotating their arms behind their waist or above .
It takes a long time for such patients to recover .
Aid of exercise , injection of steroid in joints , telescope or general surgery is taken for treatment .
Nerves get deformed due to diabetes .
Blockage occurs in blood circulation in vessels by excess of glucose in blood and other defects can also arise in vessels because of which most patients lose balance related control of sense and body .
Many problems like shock in hands and feet , feeling a burning sensation , in hands and feet going numb , occurrence of paralysis and fingers getting distorted can originate .
Defect can also arise in the muscles of feet and patient is unable to walk properly .
Occurrence of problem like compression of nerve by thickening and stiffening of skin near and inside joints and by blood circulation not occurring normally is a common symptom .
Mostly nerves of wrists can compress , by compression of medial nerve of wrist ' carpal tunnel syndrome ' occurs .
In this pain , shock and numbness which usually increases at night time occur in thumb and with it in two and a half fingers .
This difficulty can also happen to patients of diabetes by working on the computer in a wrong position or working much , holding the newspaper , etc. .
This problem occurs more in patients of diabetes in those doing work related to much bending and rotating of wrist .
The treatment of every problem in diabetes starts with control of glucose in blood through medicines .
Hence control on amount of glucose is vital to prevent adverse effects on nerves because of diabetes .
In addition to this treatment is done by pain killers , vitamins , pancreas transplant .
Main cause of disease of kidneys is a diabetes generated disease .
In their lifetime about 40 % diabetes patients get afflicted with disease of kidneys .
Disease of kidneys occurring due to diabetes is called nephropathy .
This disease is detected in diabetes patients when protein products in urine are found to be 500 mg on running a urine test .
In comparison to white people the chance of occurrence of diabetes generated kidney disease in Asian Indians is 40 times more .
On initial level kidney disease in diabetes patients is detected via a special test when the level of their albumin is found abnormal   30 mg  per day  .
This level is called insipient diabetic nephropathy .
The danger of kidney and heart disease to such patients is more .
This disease can be stopped via initial diagnosis and proper treatment of disease .
The following are the causes of diabetes generated kidney disease .
Having disease of diabetes for a long time .
Not having a proper control on blood glucose .
High blood pressure , heredity , race , smoking etc . can also be causes of diabetes generated kidney disease .
Diabetes generated kidney disease occurs because of protein urea  on increase in amount of protein in urine  and glomerular filtration rate  G . . .  .
The main cause of diabetes generated kidney disease is uncontrolled level of blood glucose in body .
However imbalance of blood glucose in body is harmful for cells and other body parts which can become a cause of various kinds of ailments .
Hence it is possible to prevent diabetes generated kidney disease to quite an extent keeping level of blood glucose controlled in diabetes patients and diagnosing the disease on the preliminary level and detecting microalbumin urea in the urine .
Urine of 24 hours is tested to detect microalbumin urea .
This is the most reliable test for detecting microalbumin urea .
For the diagnosis of insipient diabetic nephropathy ratio of albumin and retaining is detected in urine .
It is also possible to do this test by a recent sample of urine .
Preliminary prevention is having control on blood glucose .
The normal level of HbA1C blood glucose is Up to 7 % .
Chances of other complications arising because of diabetes remain less till this level but on HbA1c being more than 7 % all relative efforts should be made to control blood glucose .
By a reduction of 1 %  about 32 mg of blood glucose per day  in HbA1C there is a reduction of 38 % in diabetic retinopathy and 22 % to 38 % in diabetic nephropathy .
Therefore diabetes patient can prevent other disease occurring from this disease by keeping proper control on blood glucose .
Diabetes patients should keep blood pressure less than 125  75 .
Reducing blood pressure from 85 to 81 means reducing diabetes generated kidney disease by 55 % .
It remains quite useful to give medicines like Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors for keeping level of blood pressure maintained normal .
It is important for prevention of kidney disease that you reduce the amount of protein going in the urine of patient , you maintain proper control on blood glucose and blood pressure .
Take appropriate therapy for anemia , lipid ailment and treat it taking antibiotic medicines or injections of insulin on much increase in amount of glucose .
Conclusively you can say that diabetes generated kidney disease is the main cause of kidney failure .
Hence diabetes patients should keep doing their regular check-up so that preliminary diagnosis of the diabetes generated kidney disease is possible and through relative treatment the disease is stopped from advancing .
Condition of ailments related to metabolism of glucose , fats and proteins in body or complete deficiency of insulin is called diabetes .
In both there is adverse effect on processes of various body parts like metabolism nervous system by defect in insulin and increase in glucose level and immunity system and skin also gets affected by it .
In most of the diabetes afflicted patients changes related to skin are seen .
However in most of the cases causes of changes that occur in skin remain unknown .
Because of occurrence of defect in vessels , nerves or because of decrease in immunity in body due to excess of glucose and imbalanced level of insulin skin related disease occur in diabetes patients .
Because of diabetes such substances get accumulated below skin and inside skin by which skin becomes thick and tough .
Normally such a situation arises at that time when residual substances do not get out of skin through sweat .
Because of diabetes activities of joints become limited .
In some patients due to accumulation of proteins in the fingers of hands and feet there is inconvenience in trying to move them and their efficiency is affected badly .
Various types of wounds and injuries occur in feet and legs on increase in level of glucose in blood or not consuming the medicines properly .
Because of these wounds and injuries a specific kind of fluid gets stored in the arteries .
In some cases blood circulation can lessen or stop in the skin of body .
Because of diabetes deep wounds that are non-healing occur .
Efficiency of nervous system gets adversely affected by excess of glucose in arteries that convey blood to the nervous system .
As a result of which that organ or part of body goes numb and injury in numbed parts can not be detected and the danger of occurrence of infection in the wound is retained .
Excess of glucose makes the immune system of the body also atrophic .
By which microbes  germs admitted in the body do not terminate because of which body becomes prey to any kind of infection soon .
Some of the main microbes of these are in this manner : Streptococcus , Staphylococcus . . Coli . . tuberculosis virus , Herpes Zoster , Herpes Simplex , Fungi , Candida , Micromyosis , Dermatofitosis , etc .
Occurrence of rashes and boils in body because of diabetes is a common problem .
In addition to this fatal diseases like necrotizing fasciitis and cellulites carbuncle can also occur .
Blood related disease named mucormycosis can occur because of diabetes .
Amount of fat in body increases due to diabetes .
Amount of glucose increases because of a specific enzyme by which efficiency of body reduces or ends .
Red and yellow rashes develop on skin .
Though these rashes can be in any part of the body but generally they are more near the joints .
Rashes named ' jennthomas ' develop by amount of cholesterol or triglycerides increasing in blood .
Certain part of skin of body becomes dark and thick because of abnormality of diabetes .
Sometimes disease named ' acanthosis nigricans ' can also occur .
In addition to this following diseases are also seen because of diabetes , like - malignant otitis media , rhinocerebral mucormycosis , pseudomonas infection , bullosis diabeticorum , necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum , etc .
Caution to prevent adverse effects of diabetes .
Keep doing physical exercise .
Have meals on time .
Meals should be clean and nutritious , in which all required elements are combined .
Take medicines on time and on a regular basis .
By these cautions you can keep yourself safe from the adverse effects of diabetes .
In only 15 % of patients of diabetes symptoms of nerve diseases are seen , whereas in up to 50 % patients muscle deformities and nerve related defects are found .
Symptoms of nerve diseases are found most in patients of 50 years of age and above , lesser in those below 30 years of age and in about negligible amount in patients in childhood .
Because of diabetes many forms of nerve related diseases are found .
In diabetes ophthalmoplegia there are eye related complications .
In serious mononeuropathy outburst of disease is seen in form of muscle deformity of muscles of arms and body .
Mononeuropathy disease advances fast .
There is acute pain in mononeuropathy disease .
Neuropathy disease affects the main organs in an unequal way .
In mononeuropathy disease main muscles become weak and their weight decreases .
In mononeuropathy disease there is no pain in muscles , there is lack of consciousness .
During mononeuropathy disease sometimes the disease seems to be increasing then sometimes it appears to be decreasing .
Remote like preliminary sensory polyneuropathy affects feet and legs instead of hands .
Polyneuropathy advancing gradually takes the form of a serious disease .
In self conducted nerve defect generally bladder and blood circulatory system are affected more .
Abdominal nerve defect and radiculopathy generally occur together .
Particularly remote sensory nerve defect and abdominal nerve defect occur together .
Hyperglycemia , that is , level of glucose in blood increases which takes nerves into its clutches .
It has recently been seen in researches that with the aid of medicines the effect that it has on hyperglycaemic nerves can be influenced through a right balance between impaired glucose tolerance and peripheral neuropathy .
Innumerable changes in relation to pathology are being seen in both myelinated and unmyelinated kinds of fibers .
The main causes of peripheral neuropathy are not fully known now .
According to metabolic theory amount of glucose inside cells that completely surround the glycolytic pathway increases .
According to vascular theory due to increase of endoneurial vascular resistance of hyperglycaemic blood endoneurial ischemia increases .
According to altered neurotrophic sport theory neuropathic factors play the main role for maintenance , development and repair of nervous system .
According to laminin theory the formation of laminin beta . in less than the normal amount plays the main role in diabetic neuropathy defect .
According to auto immune theory demyelination is found in cranial and peripheral nerves .
The third and sixth nerve of brain may get affected by infection of head and back bone in serious mononeuropathy diabetes and it takes a long time for it to heal .
The problem of multiple mononeuropathy and radiculopathy mostly affects the elderly patients of diabetes .
In multiple mononeuropathy there is pain in the same way in many nerves .
Multiple mononeuropathy and radiculopathy can occur in relatively less diabetes also .
Weakness and undernourishment can occur in pelvic girdle and muscles close to it but effect can be seen on remote muscles also .
In this disease the upper body parts get affected very less .
Symptoms of remote polyneuropathy diabetes are mostly like normal diabetes neuropathy .
Symptoms of remote polyneuropathy are numbness , shock and continuous pain .
Normally in this disease right symptoms are found in legs , feet and toes mostly at night time .
The clinical depiction of it is such that deep intensive decline , contractions of bladder and atrophy in hands - feet arises .
Efficiency of pupil of eye and tear glands can end by autonomic neuropathy .
You do not sweat in autonomic neuropathy , blood circulation gets affected .
Digestive system gets affected by autonomic neuropathy .
Flaccidity occurs in gastrointestinal system , bladder and genitals by autonomic neuropathy .
Blood pressure can also fall by autonomic neuropathy .
C . . . protein becomes 50 to 150 mg per cm or exceeds this too in every kind of diabetes neuropathy .
Autonomic neuropathy disease occurs on the basis of spinal nerves and ganglions getting affected .
Mostly damage by it is found in myelinated nerve fiber .
Demyelination and remyelination can also be seen in the remaining fibers of axon .
N . . and E . . . are special accessories in the diagnosis research .
Regular examination of level of blood glucose is extremely necessary .
There is only one goal of treatment that the level of blood glucose remains normal and controlled because it is connected with the damage of nerves .
In autonomic neuropathy through treatment by medicines like aldose inhibitor and albesterine weakness of patient may go .
Shock reduces and there is relief from pain by use of these medicines .
There is a recent mention of ordinary component like gangliosides in neuronal membrane literature but you get relief by it only to an extent .
The patients who have retained problems like numbness and shock in hands - feet for a long time you can give them amitriptyline medicine or anti distress like neuro generation .
Benefit also occurs by use of fluoxetine or sertraline .
You can stop fluctuations of unbearable pain by carbamazepine and fenitoina or gabapentin or pregabalin .
But normally results of these medicines are not satisfactory .
But sometimes better results are seen by neurontin .
Nerve block and epidural injections are beneficial for some patients .
There is pain for some duration in proximal , asymmetrical or ophthalmologic neuropathy which can be controlled by analgesic like diclofen , acetaminophen or tramadol .
The future of patients of remote preliminary sensory neuropathy is uncertain .
But many times it may take months or even years in other improvements and getting a relief to some extent .
Hence remember that on falling in the clutches of diabetes your life can become crippled because it can damage your nervous system also .
Therefore always consume healthy , balanced and nutritious diet by which control remains maintained on your blood glucose .
Exercise and yoga also prove to be very advantageous .
It is possible to stop long term complications of diabetes keeping control on the level of glucose in blood .
In the beginning you can have control on sugar in diabetes disease through pills .
But gradually pills stop showing effect .
To keep proper control on sugar it becomes important to take insulin .
If your doctor directs insulin then definitely take it .
Nearly 3 . crore people in our country are afflicted with diabetes and there is a chance of its increasing to 5 . 72 crore by 2025 .
World Health Organisation has called India to be the capital of diabetes .
Other than the family history sometimes some people do not have any specific problem or complaint and it is found only after testing that they are prey of this disease .
The women who have blood related disease of diabetes or are themselves diabetic should plan their family only after controlling this disease fully before conceiving taking advice of doctor and doing tests .
Sometimes patients are kept on pills for this disease .
You may need to get insulin injections stopping the pills on advice of doctor .
If this disease is for a long duration then you may need to test eyes , kidneys , heart and nervous system .
During the first three months of pregnancy if blood glucose is not controlled properly then chance of occurrence of congenital defect in child is a lot more .
If such a situation arises after pregnancy then weight of child in the womb may be above 4 kg and he may die in the womb .
Because of hormones that come out of the umbilical cord during pregnancy and pancreatic insulin that forms specially in body of women and the change in its use in the body some women get diabetes during pregnancy .
This diabetes is known by the name of gestational diabetes .
Whether a pregnant woman in normal conditions has diabetes or not , for this she is tested through GCT  Glucose Challenge Test  during 24 - 26 weeks of pregnancy .
For the test the woman doest not have to eat anything for two hours after her breakfast and after that she has to drink 50 grammes glucose .
One hour after drinking glucose she has to give her blood sample .
If it is more than 130 mg then there is a chance of G . . .
Then the woman is required to do GTT  Glucose Tolerance Test  that is of 100 grammes glucose .
Any two or more readings being more than normal the woman is considered afflicted with diabetes .
Such women who have pregnancy along with diabetes  G . . .  should be under special care of an obstetrician and gynaecologist .
Some special tests should be run on pregnant women .
You should do foetal echo or ultrasound level - II for foetus .
By which the child being healthy can be detected to quite a limit .
In the last 4 . weeks of pregnancy woman should keep note of turns by the foetus  kick count  .
In which the woman has to note the turning of child lying down for an hour in the morning , an hour during daytime and an hour at night .
During these three hours child should turn ten or more times .
In addition to this health of child can be detected to quite an extent by C . . . or through ultrasound  non stress test  .
Besides these it is important to run all tests on a diabetes afflicted pregnant woman that are told to an ordinary pregnant woman .
She should take note of the following things just as she finds out that she has a complaint of diabetes .
Take the right and nutritious diet .
Keep complete details of weight increase during pregnancy  10 - 12 kg  .
Do regular tests of blood glucose .
Take the correct and regular treatment .
Deliver in hospital on time .
Diabetes also means calorie control along with moderation from sugar , rice , potato , sweets or fruits .
Woman with normal weight should take 30 calories  kg according to her weight and woman with much weight should take 25 calories  kg .
The gist is this that she can take 1800 to 2500 calories of food in 24 hours .
She should make use of 50 - 55 % carbohydrates , 15 - 20 % proteins and remaining fats .
Out of this you should take 15 % in breakfast , 25 % in lunch , 30 % at night and the remaining calories in snacks .
You can take 10 % amount of the total energy every time in the morning , afternoon and before bed .
Normally during pregnancy weight of a woman with normal weight increases by 10 - 12 kg and weight of a woman with much weight by 7 . kg .
A pregnant woman afflicted with diabetes should  after meals  walk daily 2 . times for 20 - 30 minutes .
A woman afflicted with diabetes should soon learn to test her blood glucose and to apply injections of insulin .
You run test of sugar monitoring 7 times a day .
Before breakfast , before lunch , two hours after meals and one at 3 in the morning .
In the beginning you test everyday and later once or twice a week .
You can detect the state of last 2 - 12 weeks of blood glucose by tests of fructosamine and HbA1C .
When condition of application of insulin arrives patient should be admit in hospital and should keep glucose powder or biscuit with himself .
If blood glucose comes down a lot which is called hypoglycemia then immediately take sugar , glucose or biscuit .
There can be complaint of weakness , agitation , dizziness , sweating and fumbling with words .
Amount of insulin is increased or decreased from time to time by advice of doctor .
You can also give injections of insulin later yourself or with help from a relative at home according to advice of doctor .
You can also do sugar monitoring  empty stomach . hours after lunch 2 hours after dinner .  .
You wait for childbirth for 40 whole weeks in cases in which glucose control is good in them .
If disease of diabetes is detected late or is uncontrolled then in such a condition in pregnancy of 37 - 38 weeks you deliver artificially through medicines .
During labor you do blood glucose test of these patients quickly and glucose and insulin is given from time to time .
In many women because of large size of children , pain or high blood pressure childbirth happens by surgery .
In the beginning you give 1  V glucose to child later mother should breast feed the child again and again in 1 . hours .
Gradually you can increase it to 4 hours .
Complaint of diabetes during pregnancy becomes alright after childbirth also but it hints at future danger of diabetes to the woman .
This happens to nearly 50 % women in about 10 to 15 years .
This time can be increased by moderation in food , control on weight and regular exercise .
D . . can occur soon or in severity in the next pregnancy .
Hence before conception and in the beginning of pregnancy you should test blood glucose .
Miscarriage , congenital defects in children especially diseases of bones and heart can occur in uncontrolled diabetes .
In pregnant women according to duration and seriousness of diabetes dangerous difficulties like eye disease , heart disease , kidney disease , high blood pressure along with stroke can occur .
By infection a lot of difficulties can occur in treatment of pregnant woman with diabetes .
You can lead a simple and good life by taking care of yourself and following advice of doctor .
The use of appropriate device for family planning is wisdom .
You can take O . . . contraceptive pills easily . You can take only progesterone or contraceptive pills with it both .
It is necessary to test glucose amount in blood from time to time .
If diabetes is properly controlled by pills and insulin then you can do laparoscopic sterilisation to keep family restricted .
It is absolutely necessary to beware and cautious of diabetes for health .
Certain difficulties like obesity , high blood pressure , cancer of genitals , etc increase danger of diabetes with aging .
There is a saying that prevention is better than cure then be careful when there is time .
Make less use of sugar and sweets , do not let weight increase , do exercise and yoga .
Disease of diabetes can occur in a new born baby also .
Disease of diabetes that is found in small children is known in the form of D . . Type . in the medical world the meaning of which is deficiency of insulin or dependence on insulin .
In this deficiency of those cells occurs in pancreas gland that make insulin .
According to a survey the number of diabetes afflicted children is different in various races , countries .
On the basis of a survey where you find number of new cases in Karachi  Pakistan  to be 9 per lakh there in Finland you find it to be 40 per lakh and here this number increases per year .
In America in about a 1000 children 2 children are afflicted with diabetes .
But the main cause is genetic in which defect can occur in many genes and you do its classification on that basis itself .
In addition to this other causes present in environment infection , chemicals , geographical causes and food etc are main .
Rubella virus is main in infection .
To detect the chances of this disease we have to take the aid of genetic antibodies and metabolic markers .
The foremost genetic locus is H . . . Class - II .
Yes , disease of type . diabetes can occur in the week before birth itself and it cures on it own after staying for a few weeks or months .
You get to see disease of type . diabetes mainly in those children whose weight is less .
You see the same symptoms , that is , symptoms of urination and deficiency of water in these children also .
The treatment of these is also less sugar and insulin .
You see the irregularity of chromosome . in it .
But disease of diabetes that is found in some children can stay for life .
Amount of insulin that pancreas produces getting imbalanced is its main cause .
Disease of diabetes . . . II , that occurs in older children , that is , in the age of 15 - 16 years is like disease of diabetes occurring in adults only and its treatment is also possible with medicines like the disease of adults .
Disease of diabetes is mainly found in their parents also and its treatment also depends on pills .
It is also necessary to keep control on food , etc .
If there is not enough insulin in the body or there is some kind of a defect in insulin then glucose is unable to enter the stores of body and keeps getting accumulated in quite an amount in the blood circulation .
This condition is called diabetes .
Diabetes is a very unmanageable and difficult disease .
In this disease patient can keep himself healthy paying enough attention to food and his lifestyle .
Medicines work in diabetes disease only when diet of the patient is suitable .
Diabetes occurs because of heredity , obesity , being seated all the time , defect of liver , etc .
Diabetes patient feels very thirsty and also very hungry .
There is an urge to urinate again and again but urine comes out in small amount every time .
The disease resistance capacity of diabetes patient reduces .
Because of diabetes boils - rashes , itching , herpes , etc diseases begin .
Diabetes patient can have high blood pressure and heart disease .
There are many easy ways of keeping amount of glucose balanced in diabetes .
Bitter gourd is as beneficial as ambrosia in diabetes .
With use of bitter gourd glucose reduces quite a lot in blood .
By consumption of water of fenugreek seeds regularly for two months patients of diabetes get special a benefit .
Indian blackberry also proves to be efficient in diabetes disease .
Patient of diabetes gets special benefit by bringing in use 5 - 10 Indian blackberries everyday .
You should also include bottle gourd , cucumber , gherkin , tomatoes , Indian gooseberry , green leafy vegetables in your diet .
Consuming porridge is best in diabetes disease .
Afflicted with obesity and heart patients can also consume this porridge .
You should also use buttermilk in your diet regularly .
You can bridle diabetes by having regular meals , doing exercise , yogasana and having a stroll .
Diabetes is such a metabolism related disease that affects various parts of body .
Because of this disease mainly blood arteries and nerves get affected .
When a damage occurs in arteries and nerves of retina of eye because of diabetes then that condition is called diabetes retina damage .
In this defect fine cracks develop in surfaces of delicate blood arteries of the retina of eye because of which blood fluid starts leaking out .
This fluid produces swelling on the retina of eye because of which there is production of eye defect .
This eye defect can occur in various ways like - reduction in vision , finding difficulty in identifying colors , distorted appearance of shape .
There is adverse effect on retina of eye because of diabetic retinopathy which is of two types .
non - proliferative diabetic retinopathy .
In this condition because of walls of fine vessels of retina becoming weak they become extended in an irregular manner like a thin balloon .
It bursts due to weakening of walls because of which blood inside the fine vessels comes out and starts leaking on the retina .
Blood leaking on the retina itself can become the cause of blindness .
In this manner fluid of blood can also leak from weak walls of vessels which can later take form of a tough clot .
If this secretion gets accumulated on the pupil then it can become the cause of blindness .
Circulation of fluid stops because of the adverse effect on sensitive vessels of retina of eyes in diabetes .
There is destruction of elements of these nerves and they appear as flimsy bunches .
That very part of retina becomes inactive in which bunches of this kind form .
Because of less blood circulation in retina of eye in non - proliferative diabetic retinopathy a certain augmentation element starts forming because of which creation of new sensitive blood vessels starts .
These vessels burst due to weakening and there is coagulation of blood on retina .
There is huge deceleration on vision by this .
The chance of defect of retina of eye remains in patients of diabetes .
After about 10 years of diagnosis of diabetes in patients afflicted with diabetes defect of retina of eye can occur in about 80 % of these patients .
Normally it reaches 90 % after 25 years .
The more diabetes remains controlled the more is the chance of diabetic retinopathy delayed .
If the eye specialist feels that patient has caught disease in retina then he runs a test on him which we call fluorescein angiography .
In which a dye is inserted in the nerves via needle and a photograph of retinas of eyes is taken .
By this it is known till where the disease has progressed .
Thereafter you treat the patient according to the stage of progress of disease and if it is necessary then you treat the afflicted part by heating it via laser .
Nowadays there is production of such medicines also through which it is possible to treat applying needle to eye .
To escape from this disease keep diabetes in control .
Test your eyes on a regular basis .
On occurrence of complaints like blurring in vision , sudden reduction of vision , appearance of black spots in front of eyes , etc . consult your eye specialist without delay .
Once loss of eyesight occurs because of occurrence of damage to eye retina you can not bring it back .
It is possible to prevent occurrence of damage of retina in future by doing right treatment .
In disease of diabetes amount of glucose in blood increases .
Diabetes disease is a serious disease on which if you do not get control in time then it can also prove to be fatal .
Production of insulin in our body occurs through pancreas and insulin controls the amount of glucose .
Amount of glucose in blood increases by deficiency of insulin and patient gets afflicted with diabetes disease .
The main symptoms of diabetes disease are - feeling thirsty , blurring of vision , constant urge to urinate , failure in sexual activities , and numbness of hands and feet .
Excessive increase in amount of glucose in blood is the main cause behind all these , it is called hyperglycemia .
When amount of glucose reduces a lot in blood then it is called hypoglycemia .
This condition of hypoglycemia can prove to be very harmful .
The main causes of this condition can be excess amount of medicines , taking less amount of food , excessive exercising .
Uncontrolled diabetes is the birth giver  mother of many long term complications .
Damage to nervous system by which adverse effect on nerves like numbness of hands and feet , burning sensation else pain is a common thing which starting from the tip of fingers can slowly go upwards .
In this way joints and the soft ligaments near them get affected in diabetes orthopathy .
Normally first of all joints of shoulders get affected .
Pain first starts in shoulders then its effect is seen on activities of shoulders .
Patient starts feeling inconvenience in his daily activities like changing clothes , combing hair , etc. .
Physiotherapy can prove extremely beneficial for these complications related to diabetes disease .
The main aim of physiotherapy in complications related to neuropathy and orthopathy is especially pain relief and reducing swelling .
Other than this the goal of physiotherapy is that of prevention of joints getting twisted , restoring twisted joints to their old condition , making joints flexible and strong .
Other than this physiotherapy proves helpful in making patients dispose of their daily activities smoothly and systematically .
Infrared rays , shortwave diathermy , laser therapy , interferential therapy , ultrasonic rays , cold and hot packs , etc . methods are used in diabetes for pain relief .
Other than this some specific exercises also prove beneficial in pain relief and making joints active .
Diabetes also affects adversely the kidneys , eyes , heart and blood vessels and because of this there can be occurrence of problems like stroke , paralysis and obstruction in blood circulation .
The chance of occurrence of such diseases in patients of diabetes is many times more .
In the rehabilitation of such patients the role of physiotherapy remains significant .
Through the method of physiotherapy using certain specific techniques of exercise you make patient capable of leading a normal life .
These techniques take the aid of splintage and walking aids .
There can be infections of mouth , gums , lungs , skin , hands , feet , kidneys , urinary bladder and genitals of diabetes patient .
The infections occurring in patients of diabetes take longer to heal as compared to infections in the normal patients .
In physiotherapy department they make use of techniques like diapulse therapy or pulsar shortwave diathermy , ultraviolet for the treatment of injuries like ulcers of patients and bed sores of diabetes patients .
A certain technique of exercise is told by which there is appropriate maintenance of speed of blood circulation and patient gets relief .
If diabetes is kept in control then it is possible to prevent the adverse effects on other parts of body and diabetes patient can take pleasure of normal life .
It is necessary that these four pillars be followed arduously - food intake and nutrition , physical activities and exercise , regular examination of blood glucose , consumption of medicines according as instructed by physician .
Today diabetes is spread in the whole world on a large level .
Diabetes has emerged in the form of a universally accepted disease .
One out of every eight individuals in India is afflicted with diabetes .
Diabetes is actually a disease related to metabolism of carbohydrates .
On digestion of carbohydrate sugar reaches the liver in the form of glucose being absorbed by blood .
In the liver it depends on a hormone called insulin converted to glycogen which assists in the oxidation of glucose .
Insulin is that which stores glucose converting it to glycogen .
On occurrence of deficiency of insulin a hindrance is produced in metabolism .
As a result glucose does not get converted to glycogen due to which there is increase in level of glucose in blood and glucose starts getting expelled through urine .
Nowadays a variety of treatments and methods are available in the field of cosmetic science one of them is aroma therapy .
Aroma meaning fragrance and therapy meaning treatment , that is , treatment through fragrance .
Aroma therapy is a method the prevalence of which has increased a lot nowadays .
Aroma therapy is proving to be quite effective in health related diseases other than brightening up and gracing the beauty of skin .
What is aroma therapy ?
According to the popular beauty specialist Dr . Blossom Kochar , one using this therapy for more than 25 years , essence is extracted from things obtained from plants and trees , leaves , roots , bark , fruits and flowers , vegetables , spices , etc . which is called essential oil .
The speciality of essential oil is that it is extremely strong .
In essential oils there is no mixture of chemical elements .
From a ton of rose leaves only 1 litre essential oil is obtained which is equivalent to 25 grammes of herbal cream .
These oils are the complete life force of plants and trees , whereas only herbs are used in the herbal process .
These essential oils are anti - bacterial , antiseptic , antiviral , antifungal , anti - inflammatory , anti - rheumatic , anti - neurologic , anti - toxic , anti - depressant and deoderising .
Essential oil is beneficial in treatment .
Blossom Kochar says that treatment through these essential oils is a very pure process .
But before treatment it is very important to know how oils prove effective for us .
Aroma oils get benefit for us in three ways .
First - Under influence of their fragrance our mind immediately becomes stimulated .
Second - Reaching the inner layer of our skin through massage it heals it .
Third - They affect our mood .
These essential oils are used for the treatment of many types of problems .
Essential oil is used for many other problems that are skin related , hair related , mind  heart related and related to women .
Other than this some essential oils are used in food .
Essential oils prove effective for skin related problems like acne , occurrence of wrinkles , skin with spots and blemishes , infection of skin , sunburn , dark circles all around eyes , etc .
The requirement is of knowing the problem properly and treating it right .
Dr . Kochar says that for the treatment of skin essential oil is not applied on that spot from outside .
If there is formation of dark circles all around your eyes then to treat with this process it is very important to know as to why there is such formation .
After this beauty specialist treats with that process in which the person is given lavender essential oil for inducing sleep .
Mind and body both relax by patting on body a few drops of it mixed in water .
Then in the treatment process of dark circles a bit of shredded radish and pumpkin is soaked in a little warm milk .
Now they ask you to apply on dark circles straining them and mixing a drop of essential oil in them .
They ask you to apply aroma magic eye gel once a week .
Unless your mind is at peace , unless you feel sleepy , dark circles will not go away just by outer treatment .
Similarly if there is an acne problem then it has been seen for certain that they are found only in oily skin .
Hence they use such essential oils which has the quality of removing grease .
Put a few drops of essential oil in rose water and use camphor oil for cleaning face .
Other than this they ask you to take complete care of diet like avoiding consuming spicy , fried things , keeping stomach clean .
Through essential oils treatment of big problems related to skin also occurs properly like cellulite .
Cellulite is a kind of a layer of fat which gets accumulated in thighs , arms , on stomach , neck , etc .
It is mostly seen happening in women on hormone getting imbalanced , before period , during pregnancy and during menopause .
You have to see why there is fat accumulation .
Then as a method of treatment geranium essential oil is used in bathing water for massage .
Other than this physical exercise and diet are only its treatment .
Essential oils are a boon for hair .
They prove very useful for all kinds of hair problems like in problems of hair fall , dandruff .
Problem of hair fall is very common nowadays .
For this keep your hair clean , comb them a lot , straight and back in both manners .
Other than this make a mixture of certain oils for hair roots like castor oil , sesame seed oil , olive oil . Mix them all taking one spoon each .
Mix five drops of lavender oil and five drops of essential oil in it and massage your head with it .
Massaging at night wash with shampoo in the morning .
If you do not do this then bring into use stimulant oil .
Hair fall will stop by this .
If there is body ache then put a few drops of lavender and eucalyptus essential oil in coconut oil and pat it on body .
Hyper pigmentation are those spots of a dark color on face and other parts of body which reduce the attraction of skin .
Skin related problem of hyper pigmentation can happen to man or woman anyone .
Women have to face this problem more due to their delicate skin .
This problem is seen more during summer because sunlight is stronger during these days .
Ultraviolet rays of Sun burn the skin because of which spots and blemishes occur on it .
In relation to this problem of hyper pigmentation the popular cosmetologist of Nature ' s Essence Sunita Arora says ' the cells of skin are responsible for hyper pigmentation . .
These cells are called melanocytes .
These melanocyte cells produce a substance called melanin .
Problem of hyper pigmentation arises by overstimulation of these melanin cells in some parts of skin .
The main cause of hyper pigmentation is burning of skin in strong sunlight .
Various kinds of hormonal changes occur due to use of fertility and birth control pills .
Hormonal change makes the skin more sensitive to sunlight .
Hyper pigmentation can occur because of this .
Similarly many times complaint of hyper pigmentation can also occur due to medicines like Aminodaron , Mainosaiclin , tetracycline , and Blamaisin Saiclafosfemaid .
Hyper pigmentation that occurs due to change in hormones can heal on its own after pregnancy is over .
But many times its treatment becomes necessary .
There are two ways of treatment of hyper pigmentation .
In the first method there is use of bleaching agent on skin .
This bleaching agent neither bleaches the skin nor does it lighten the complexion of skin .
In fact it stops the excessive production of melanin .
This method of hyper pigmentation is very effective .
Bleaching agent ends the root cause of disease .
Now such essential oils have come that are helpful in rectifying the problem of pigmentation .
Regular use of essential oil gives better results .
Under the other ways of treatment such products are use that lighten the complexion of problematic skin .
Most products of this kind are sunscreen creams based on hydroquinone .
By this treatment problem of 60 to 70 % women gets fixed .
While using sunscreen keep this in mind that the cream you are using should be of high quality .
By use of a bad cream the effect of ultraviolet rays on skin increases rapidly .
Due to which danger of skin cancer increases .
There is a saying that prevention is better than cure .
To prevent hyper pigmentation maintain caution somewhat this way .
Since main cause of hyper pigmentation is strong sunlight hence save yourself from the sun .
Use an umbrella while going out of house .
Apply an mask of Fuller 's earth on skin and other open parts twice a week .
Splash your face and eyes with water after coming from outside and clean your face and arms with cleansing milk or the most effective home-made cleanser bran .
Apply juice of cucumber on face you will get relief .
If you have to get out in the sun then definitely apply a sunscreen of good company on your face and other exposed parts of your body .
When the complaint of hyper pigmentation starts get it treated only then .
Also try to find out if this problem is not because of the hormonal changes occurring during pregnancy .
Do not take the spots and freckles appearing on your body lightly consult a skin specialist as soon as there is such a problem .
Use herbal products .
Always use cosmetics of good quality .
If you have skin related problems then wear cotton clothes with full sleeves .
By this the rays of Sun will not be able to cause harm to you .
While going out in the sun do not forget to wear sunglasses .
Pay special attention to you diet .
On occurrence of complaint of pigmentation do not include many fried things in your diet .
Eat fresh fruits and fruit juice .
There are many ways of maintaining the beauty of skin you will just have to make an effort .
If you do not want to become a mother then there many kinds of contraceptives in the market .
Result is that life of women is now under their control .
Now they have more faith in themselves .
This time there is information of various kinds of contraceptives for you .
Contraceptives are of two kinds .
One temporary and the other permanent .
Use of temporary contraceptive can be stopped anytime .
But it is not so with permanent .
Those days are gone when women were dependent on men for family planning .
Here for a few years a lot of awareness has come amongst women regarding family planning .
Or you can say that due to arrival of many kinds of contraceptives for women self-confidence has developed in them and they have started feeling themselves as free .
Whether they want to be pregnant or not is their decision but women are in confusion due to arrival of many kinds of contraceptives .
They feel which method should be adopted , what are the side effects of a method , which have what benefits and which contraceptive is good for what age .
Normally 15 to 45 years of age is such an age - group in women in which they can get pregnant .
It can happen before fifteen years of age in some cases and also after 45 years of age .
Hence a woman should get cautious as soon as she comes in this age - group .
The woman who knows about the means of birth control properly only she can balance her life .
Before knowledge of means of birth control it is very important to have knowledge of your body .
There are two ovaries in a woman 's body .
Every month there is formation of an egg in them .
If that day there is union of egg with the sperm of male then the woman will get pregnant .
Therapists agree that this happens around the fourteenth day .
Hence those days if a woman uses the means of birth control or does not have sex with man then she will not get pregnant .
There are many ways for this .
Temporary birth control means that you can conceive stopping the use of birth control whenever you want .
You can never conceive again by permanent birth control .
One uses the birth control pills from the fifth day after the beginning of menstruation .
The most appropriate time for taking the birth control pills is the night time .
Birth control pills should be taken with milk before going to bed .
Here you are being told of the temporary birth control .
Natural method is that one in which after finding out the unsafe day one keeps away from sex on those days .
While continuing the activity of sex the man should ejaculate outside .
There are two ways of detecting the unsafe days .
First is that one should not have sex around the fourteenth day .
How to find out about the unsafe days around the fourteenth day ?
If your menstrual cycle is of 28 days meaning if your periods have started on the first date then we would consider time from eleventh to twentieth day as unsafe .
Birth control pills are known by the name of oral contraceptive .
The use of these pills is for those women who are unmarried , who do not have any child or they do not want a child soon after the wedding .
Other than this those women to whom Copper . does not suit .
It is good for women from 15 to 25 years of age to take this pill but only after a clinical examination .
These pills are of three kinds .
One is those in which there are synthetic hormones named estrogen and progesterone .
In the other kind of pills there is only progesterone .
It is for those women who are breastfeeding their children .
Third kind of pills are those in which there are no hormones like Saheli .
Some contraceptive pills are available in a pack of 21 pills like Ovral , Novelon , Femilon , etc . and some in packs of 28 pills like Mala . , Mala . .
Seven pills in a pack of 28 pills are those of iron and multivitamin .
If you forget someday then take it when you remember the next day or take two pills together .
Keep in mind if you forget too many times then these pills not do their work .
This way these pills provide 99 % protection from conception .
You should definitely keep getting clinically examined from time to time .
By taking birth control pills periods become regular .
Pain and bleeding during period lessens and there is prevention of anemia .
There is also prevention of breast tumor , ectopic pregnancy and rheumatoid arthritis .
Other than this you get safe from the day you start taking pills .
Sometimes there is spotting from time to time , head reels for some time , or the menstrual month is very less .
Fungus infection occurs .
Nausea , vomiting , etc . these symptoms occur in the beginning on taking medicine .
Therefore doctor asks to take pills at night .
Headache and depression also occurs in many women .
But if you take pills with doctor 's advice then it is possible to prevent these kinds of side effects .
Intero uterine contraceptive device  IUD  is known as Copper . in common language .
Befitting the name it is in the form of a small T on which there is copper .
It is fitted inside the uterus by the doctor .
It is a painless and bloodless activity of only two minutes .
It is an easy and reliable method of birth control .
The success of Copper . is 98 % .
One uses it to give a gap after the first child between the second child .
Whenever there is desire to conceive you can get it out easily .
To apply this physician calls the desiring women immediately after menstruation only when there has been no relationship of woman - man and there has been no conception .
But at that woman should not have infection in her reproductive parts .
After fitting Copper . during menstruation a woman can feel the thread by inserting two fingers in her vagina .
You are not to pull this thread .
If there is no pain or pricking sensation then its alright .
One month after applying Copper . , after three months you should do clinical examination .
If you are having excessive pain in abdomen , there is much burning and itching , then you should show it to the physician immediately .
The duration of Copper . is of 3 years but certain such multiload Copper - Ts have become available in India which remain alright for five to ten years .
Other than this a Copper . has also come which comprises medicine and is for those women who have problem of excessive bleeding .
It works as a contraceptive also and problem of bleeding also gets cured .
There is no specific side effect of Copper . but it does not protect from sexual infections .
When is use of birth control not right ?
If a woman gets a temperature while taking birth control pills or pain in teeth .
If due to some reason she is taking antibiotic , she gets diarrhoea , so the efficiency of these pills reduces in such a state .
Hence in these conditions she should use other birth control methods like condom .
Those women who have diabetes , heart or liver problem should not take these pills at all .
These pills also should not be taken at all on there being high blood pressure , thyroid , bleeding disorder , etc .
Women infected with epilepsy and TB also should not take birth control pills .
Similarly those women should not apply a Copper . who are unmarried and who do not have a single child .
Those who have diabetes also should not fit Copper . .
There is one way of not allowing the sperm inside , condom .
It is known by the name of Nirodh .
Condom is used by men .
But if it is used properly then it provides protection up to 97 % .
Men should pull it on their erect penis carefully and keep it loose at the tip so that semen can accumulate there .
If you do not leave it loose at the tip then condom will tear during ejaculation and semen can enter the vagina .
For complete protection woman should keep a vaginal tablet inside her vagina .
It is possible to prevent HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases using condom .
Vaginal tablet is a good method of birth control for women .
If used the right way vaginal tablet provides 70 to 80 % protection .
This vaginal tablet is available by the name of Today .
Only woman makes use of vaginal tablet Today .
The advantage of it is that it is in the woman 's hands to use it when she wants to .
There are no side effects of vaginal tablet .
Contraceptive injectable are of two types .
If women decide to adopt this method then have to go to the doctor to get a depo injection .
You get depo injection for three months .
You get the injection that is for five years under the skin .
By applying injection of three months menstruation stops .
You have to get at an interval of every three months .
This injection does not provide protection from sexually transmitted infections .
There can be problems like headache , heaviness in breasts , nausea , disinterest in sex .
If ever because of some reason there is unprotected sex or occurrence of incidence like rape then you can prevent conception by using emergency contraception .
In this physician asks to eat two pills at an interval of twelve hours .
But this should not be used in routine .
Someday a situation also comes when you feel like you can not prevent unwanted pregnancy .
This is when emergency pills come useful .
In most families of Indian society the popular methods of family planning are adopted less even today .
Even if adopted the responsibility comes around and falls on the woman 's head only .
Either she gets sterilisation or takes aid of Copper . else pills but men often avoid sterilisation or use of condom .
As far as the question of contraceptives related to women is concerned they also have their advantages and disadvantages .
There is chance of infection by Copper . in woman 's genitals .
They advise those women who do not have any child or have only one child and want another child in future to avoid it .
Similarly taking pills also has its own difficulties .
Illiterates far from it even educated women forget to take them regularly .
They also have side - effects which can effect adversely on the bodies of women .
Perhaps this is the reason that despite running family planning programs on the both the levels of government as well as non - government even today women become unwanted mothers in a large number .
According to a report of national health survey even today 78 % of conceptions in India are unplanned .
In this also 25 % conceptions are such when husband - wife or woman does not want a child but conceive .
It is the result of this unplanned and unwanted conception that 70 lakh abortions out of the about one crore abortions occurring in the country are of one 's own will .
This is a reality that during abortion or because of complications borne out of it 20000 women have to lose their lives .
Today such a contraceptive is desperately required that can save women from unplanned or unwanted  especially in a condition of rape  pregnancies .
Anyhow popular contraceptives do not give women a hundred percent guarantee of not conceiving .
Condom tears during use  rate of success 84 %  then on slightest irregularity in taking pills undoes all that was done .
Natural contraception  based on the counting of menstrual cycle  is also in the same condition .
Most of the women do not even remember the date they had their last menstrual period .
They do not even know which days of the menstrual cycle are safe from the point of view of not conceiving .
In such a case emergency contraceptives prove very useful for women .
You can take these emergency pills within three to five days on having a fear of conceiving after having a physical relationship .
Their success rate is up to 75 - 90 percent .
If any woman feels that there was a mistake of some kind during physical intercourse and since she does not want a child then she can use these .
Emergency contraceptives are of two kinds - one steroid hormone pills and second Copper releasing intrauterine device .
In steroid hormone pills high dose pills come of estrogen , in combination of estrogen - progesterone and of only progesterone .
sterilisation meaning getting a freedom from pregnancy forever .
Sterilisation is also one of the popular methods of family planning .
From both man and woman anyone can get it done .
Sterilisation is a permanent and safe measure for birth control .
Before doing it you should mull over it properly that now you do not want children ahead .
After having sterilisation , opening it is a quite difficult and expensive process .
Then there is no hundred percent guarantee of its opening .
For sterilisation of man , opening his testicles a bit both tubes located there are closed , so that they are unable to take sperms from testicles .
This way sperms stop coming in the semen of the man and the woman is unable to conceive .
For semen to be completely sperm free it takes time of three months .
After that not finding sperms in semen test they can have sexual intercourse being carefree .
Vasectomy is a very simple procedure and you do not even need to make man unconscious for it .
This procedure gets over in only 10 - 15 minutes after numbing the local area and man can go home after 15 - 20 minutes .
He has to get his check up after rest of two days .
Then he can live his life like normal days .
He can even ride his bike a week after sterilisation .
Which men can get vasectomy ?
Such men who have crossed 50 years of age .
Are mentally healthy .
Who have at least one child above the age of one year .
When can women get sterilisation ?
They can get it anytime after getting healthy .
24 - 48 hours after having a normal delivery .
You can get sterilisation simultaneously on having a caesarean delivery .
But you can get sterilisation by telescope only six weeks after having delivery be it normal or Caesarean .
You can get sterilisation three months after abortion .
For a sterilisation of woman you either cut a part of her fallopian tube or you tie it via a ring or a clip .
You call this sterilisation tubectomy method .
In another method laparoscopic sterilisation a woman 's tubes are only tied by a ring or clip seeing through a telescope .
In psychological diseases also it is the question of vascular disease .
Medical therapists misdiagnose in relation to these diseases .
The cause of psychological disorder usually is not what it is often said to be .
Rather the one and only cause is the stress of a foreign fluid .
There is accumulation of it for years .
Psychological disease and supposed progressive paralysis are the last and incurable forms .
As a consequence of an unnatural life on occurrence of indigestion there is occurrence of accumulation of foreign fluid respectively in an unknown form .
The life of everyone is invariably dependent on the increment and outcome of the unnatural fluid .
Psychological diseases occur only when foreign fluid has increased a lot and there is infection in brain from the posterior side .
Increasing civilisation is the main cause of psychological diseases .
People have started violating the natural laws .
The main fault is that of popular medical therapy the principles of which are absolutely opposite to natural laws .
There is consideration of water being bad for health and there is advice to drink alcohol , soda water , lemonade , etc instead .
Continuously smoking cigarettes mouth becomes a chimney and stomach becomes a keg of beer .
Rooms devoid of air and light and extremely crowded factories are no less harmful .
There is exertion of so much pressure by intoxicating fluids on digestion that no energy remains in the body for any other job .
Due to pressure on the brain of gas of fermentation formed during digestion there is strain on it .
If the child born by conception during intoxication is not stillborn then symptoms of madness appear in him  her at a later time .
On increase of stress of foreign fluid its particular effect is on abdominal nerves and spinal and Idavat nerve which is the main cause of psychological disorder .
As the fever remains internal disease reaches a chronic state and in the end appears in the form of psychological disease .
On expulsion of foreign fluid due to an acute disease psychological disease also disappears from time to time but on increase of stress it appears again .
As mentioned there are following benefits of sleep .
By sleeping regularly all the fatigue disappears .
By sleeping regularly you get new energy for doing new work .
By sleeping regularly your life increases .
There is also protection from vision defect , Dhatudaubalya , diseases of head , laziness , urinary deficiency and blood defects .
By sleeping regularly mind and organs both get rest .
Before sleeping you should rid your mind of all grief , worry and fear and wish for success with happiness , contentment and patience .
By this you will find a great change in yourself in the morning .
By following the above nature - provided eight rules properly human life becomes long and full of and health , prosperity , joy - wealth , pleasure .
Mint is a fragrant and useful medicine .
Mint is found at every place in India .
Mint is produced during summer .
Vitamin A is found in an abundant amount in mint .
Mint has the extraordinary potential of producing disease resistance energy and also has the ability of producing digestive juices .
According to Ayurvedic opinion mint is delicious , interesting , easy in digestion , sharp tasting , bitter , digestive and that which removes nausea .
Mint is that which relaxes heartburn and mind and removes cachetic cough .
Mint fills wounds and provides benefit in helminthiasis , poison , detachment .
Mint is that which removes dyspepsia , tympanitis , loose motions , cough , breathing problems , low blood pressure , urinary deficiency , skin diseases , cholera , indigestion , flu , etc .
The sharp extract that comes out of mint seed is an anesthetic , pain killer and a germ killer .
Use of mint is done in diseases .
You cure malaria disease by taking one spoon juice each of mint and ginger morning and evening .
You destroy gases and worms in stomach by drinking juice of mint putting one pinch of rock salt in it .
Take honey mixed in mint juice in diseases of indigestion , indigestion by overeating , detachment , dyspepsia , etc. .
By gargling juice of mint mixing in water bad breath does not remain .
In pneumonia , diseases of nose , etc , take two to three drops of juice of mint and mint with ginger juice mixing in one spoon of honey twice .
Herpes goes away by applying mint and lemon mixed .
On occurrence of cholera give to drink juice of mint and ginger juice with honey mixed in juice of lemon or give extract of mint morning and evening .
In a scorpion bite apply juice of mint at the spot of bite and give to drink sugar mixed in juice of mint .
This application comes handy in treatment of all poisonous bites .
In Hysteria it is beneficial to drink juice of mint everyday in morning and evening , warming it a bit after extraction .
They have told of mouth cancer in many parts of India due to popularity of tobacco .
Other than cancer of mouth number of patients of cancer of uterus , breast , larynx , oesophagus , lungs , liver and gall bag is also in abundance .
Along with the consumption of tobacco and substances made from it , consumption of pan masala and liquor is in the whole of India .
By tobacco and its consumption there has also been abundance of other diseases of other parts of body other than cancer .
Now there is no limit to occurrence of cancer of other parts of body of any age or sex .
You may treat cancer by any method but after cure its re - examination is necessary .
Many patients do not come for re - examination whereas patient of cancer of any part of body should keep doing a re - examination of himself  herself every month .
By consumption of pan masala and tobacco other than diseases of various parts of body death occurs by cancer .
Concussion , weak memory power , other diseases of mind are diseases of mind .
Lukoplekia , sub mucous fibrosis , various mouth and voice diseases , cancer are diseases of mouth and throat .
Heart disease , chance of heart attack , increase of blood pressure are diseases of heart .
Cancer of oesophagus is a disease of chest .
Asthma , tuberculosis and cancer are diseases of lungs .
Cancer of liver is a disease related to liver .
Gastric wounds , cancer of all parts are diseases of abdomen .
Diseases related to liver and bladder are cancer of these parts .
Diseases related to reproductive parts of males are - sperm disabilities , impotence , etc .
Diseases related to reproductive parts of females are - infertility , cancer of uterus , etc .
Diseases of legs and intestines are - gangrene .
How and when to use water ?
If an individual upturns a lot of water in his stomach six to eight times in one meal then he would dissolve his gastric juice in such a way that it will not remain capable of doing its job as a digestive juice .
This way he will not only fill his stomach with six or eight layers but will also give it distress .
In this condition if his stomach moans with pain , his digestion is bad like it happens before then how can he complain .
Then how should you do the regulation of water intake .
If you realize a thirst before having meal then surely drink .
Thirst informs of necessity of fluid in body .
Other than this gastric juice is thick which keeps needing dissolution .
Do not drink water at all while having a meal .
Even if you drink water , drink very less in which impure gastric juice enters all food substances even in the last morsel properly .
If after having your meal on lapse of a long time if the mixture of food substances again demands some fluid to assist stomach in digestion .
In other words if after 1 . or 3 hours you feel a thirst then you can drink but in moderation .
Whenever you feel thirst drink water but the amount should not be much .
The body especially the stomach has an expectation of a fluid substance for mixing and increasing the gastric juice and for bringing in its control all the solid substances from time to time .
When neglected it keeps informing of it by itself .
Sometimes this desire for water knocks slowly and sometimes it screams and calls loudly in the form of extreme thirst .
Water taken in small amount is immediately accepted by the gastric juice and gets mixed in it easily .
Its frequency occurring every half an hour provides with more fluid .
It removes all immobility and constipation bringing a cooling and softening and dissolving while flowing through the body and intestines ordinarily .
You should drink half pound of cold water as soon as you wake up in the morning .
If the water is kept in a brass utensil it will be more beneficial .
Pyria is a kind of a disease of teeth .
It slowly destroys the natural health of body .
Pyria is made of Greek word Pyon meaning pus and Reen meaning flow .
In the language of modern medical it is called periodontal disease or periodontitis .
The symptoms of pyria are .
You find lesions of various depths around the roots of teeth .
These are full of pus .
As a result there is production of n - number of germs and bacteria in them .
In disease of pyria unpleasant smell starts coming from the mouth .
Yellowness in teeth , decay of gums starts happening .
On taking an x - ray you get a direct evidence of destruction of membrane over the teeth and roots of teeth .
Bleeding is always there due to gums becoming red and over - sensitive .
Normally there is detection of pyria on constant swelling remaining on gums and on shaking of teeth .
The types and effects of pyria .
In the first stage of pyria there is bad breath from mouth .
There is initiation of pain by pressing gums and blood by brushing .
In the second stage roots of teeth and gums swell .
Bleeding consisting of pus begins .
This discharge on reaching the stomach with swallowing of food whether solid or liquid pollutes the digestive process .
As a result there is beginning of damage to organs located in the stomach liver , kidneys , etc .
Teeth also start shaking on weakening .
In the third and the last stage due to acute infection flow of pus and blood and bad breath reach a peak .
Discharge on reaching stomach produces swelling , ulcer , dyspepsia , swelling of throat , fever and eye defect .
This very discharge when starts entering the blood begins infecting the heart , brain , kidneys , livers and lungs .
Because of it there may be diseases like dyspepsia , gastritis , hepatitis and colitis , etc .
Not cleaning you teeth properly after meals is the main cause of pyria or all diseases of teeth .
Normally people brush their teeth after waking in the morning .
Some people sleep on brushing their teeth at bedtime also .
This way it is a good thing to clean your teeth morning and evening .
But after meals or after eating and drinking anything  except water  cleaning your teeth properly is extremely important .
Pyria or prevention of dental diseases and their treatment can be successful only by these reasons otherwise not .
After meals or after eating and drinking anything their particles get stuck between teeth .
Be it bread , pulses , chocolate , coffee , milk , fat pills , ice - cream , peanuts or grams .
When decay arises in them there is production of lakhs of germs and bacteria .
As a result there is production of pus , bad breath which takes the form of pyria in the end .
On occurrence of pyria dentists often advise to remove the teeth .
Prevent too hot tea , coffee , soup and much cold beverages or solid substances like ice - cream , etc .
Do not dig your teeth with pin or needle .
Do not forget to brush your teeth with a soft brush or neem twig after every meal .
Definitely do the exercises of teeth during yogabhyasi yoga exercises .
Do not make much use of jaggery , sugar , sweets , directly biting into jaggery , sucking at a lemon with teeth .
Take jaggery making sherbet or consume jaggery making honey .
Much sour and sweet harm the teeth .
The enamel  a natural protective armor  of teeth gets worn out .
Then decay starts occurring in teeth .
Dates are full of healthy qualities .
North Africa , Egypt , Syria and Arab countries produce Pind dates .
Neera is made by extracting juice from the trees of Pind dates .
Come now we will look at the chemical composition of dates .
In the fruit of Pind date there is protein 1 . , fats 0 . , carbohydrates 33 . , fiber 3 . , mineral fluid 1 . , Calcium 0 . 022 and phosphorous 0 . 38 % .
You will find Vitamin B and C in enough quantity in Neera made from juice of this tree .
If one drinks the Neera which you make extracting juice from date tree immediately then it is very nutritious and healthy .
You also make jaggery from the juice of Pind date .
We also use it to allay rheumatism and bile .
It is nutritious , as it is that which gives strength to heart and nervous system and that which removes semen infirmity it is useful for destroying these ailments .
The fresh Neera which you make from this tree is useful in removing physical weakness , thinness and urinary obstruction and irritation .
It is extremely laxative and heat generating and you can consume it in any form with bread , milk or dry fruits .
You should make children eat dates instead of sweets .
First soak it in water for two to four hours .
Drink water in the form of sherbet .
Then while eating the soaked Pind dates take out their seeds .
While eating old Pind dates you should eat separating the pulp .
Consumption of dates is best in winters .
The way the base of a strong tree is its deep and strong roots .
In the same manner there is place of backbone or spine in the body .
There are total 33 vertebrae in the spine .
Out of which four vertebrae are related to the neck .
The spinous processes emerging out of these vertebrae control the brain , eyes , forehead , ears , nose , tongue , palate , mouth , teeth , thyroid gland and elbows .
Therefore on occurrence of any defect in the neck there is effect on all these body parts as well .
In the initial state of neck pain you feel stiffness and pain in neck .
Gradually pain and stiffness go on increasing .
Pain sometimes starts in shoulders and head and both arms .
In this numbness starts coming in one or both arms .
By this you find difficulty in cutting vegetables or writing .
The main causes of neck pain can be the following .
Wrong manner of sitting or standing like - sitting or standing pushing out a hump .
Deficiency of mineral salt and vitamins in diet .
Fried - roasted , spicy or cold stale food .
Lack of physical work .
Sleeping on soft , fluffy , thick mattresses .
Constipation or problem in digestion .
Worry , anger , envy , grief or mental stress .
Hurt in an accident , etc .
There is also a natural cure for neck pain .
Diet is the founding pillar of natural therapy .
If the diet of patient is wrong or devoid of nutritious elements meaning deficiency of vitamin D , iron , calcium , phosphorous , etc then development of bones stops .
Defect arises in bones .
Therefore to compensate for these elements you should give easily digestible and full of vitamin food .
There should be full inclusion of carrots , limes , Indian gooseberry , radish , spinach , fenugreek leaves , tomatoes , etc vegetables in diet of patient .
In fruits you should give oranges , sweet limes , apples , grapes , papaya and sapodilla .
By giving bread containing bran and sprouted food there is quick benefit .
Do water therapy in pain of neck .
Water therapy in neck pain like steam bath , heat from hot - cold bandage , spinal bath , etc treatments are beneficial .
Blood circulation increases by these treatments and foreign substances come out through pores .
You feel relief by this .
Treatment of neck pain by sun rays .
Red and orange colors of sun are quite beneficial for neck pain .
There is vitamin D in sun rays for strengthening of bones .
Patient should lie down in front of the sun on his stomach so that its rays fall directly on the neck and spine .
There should be shade on the head .
Therefore you should keep wet cloth on the head .
How to do treatment of neck pain through massage ?
You should do massage of sesame seed or mustard oil on neck of patient according to the strength of patient .
You should massage with light hands .
If you massage while sunbathing then it will be more beneficial .
The family planning program was started in the country from 1951 .
Its aim was only to plan the population .
Afterwards for the attainment of the missions of the program it started being used for mass education and propaganda .
In the decade of seventies by stressing on vasectomy extreme strictness was done in the achievement of goals .
As a result opposition was produced among masses towards family planning program .
During the seventh plan year 1985 - 90 in place of the family planning program the program was given the identity of family welfare .
In this special emphasis was given on the health related needs of women of reproductive age and children of less than five years .
In 1985 - 86 pervasive vaccination was started .
In pervasive vaccination the aim was fixed to bring down the death rate and sickness of young children from such diseases whose prevention is possible through vaccines .
Thereafter by looking at the benefits of this program in the decade of nineties child safety and safe motherhood  C . . . .  was prepared and implemented from 1992 - 93 .
In the present times all the family welfare services continuing from before were kept implemented .
In it reproductive health , youth health , sex generated disease , infection of reproductive system and AIDS were included .
It was given the name of reproduction and child health .
Reproduction and child health program was implemented in the region .
In the place of goal oriented method from the year 1997 community needs are ascertained on the basis of assessment policy .
The work plan of health workers only would be the base of all the plans .
After unifying the plans created on the sub centres it would be given the form of district work plan .
The district work plans together would take the form of state work plan .
In order to supply the goods to state the national plan would be based on the state work plan .
The partner plan is the form of proposal .
The principle essay of the ninth plan published by the planning commission has been written .
It is written in it that the government investment during the eighth plan for family welfare is reducing .
The extra expenditure of the eighth plan has also been less than that of the seventh plan .
This situation looks even more unsatisfactory .
At every level there is a need of upliftment of health care system .
The health care program should be made to reach to more and more people .
So that at the end the national goal may be achieved .
However because of the economic development , spread of education  literacy and due to the rights given to the citizens there has been a constant improvement in the program in the past years .
In the states with less execution many problems are present in relation to weak implementation , because of the women not receiving enough rights and education  literacy .
Under the reproduction and health program the solution to these problems would be achieved through the following strategy .
Giving importance to community participation in planning and services .
Adopting consumer centric arrangement in services .
Arrangement of high standard services and better training .
Removal of contraceptive goal and encouragement .
Making the services gender sensitive .
Adoption of multidimensional methods in the implementation and monitoring of services .
Under the child safety and safe motherhood  C . . . .  plan in the unification process of the programs one more step was taken in 1994 .
In the population and development conference in the country of Egypt the proposal for the unification of reproduction and child health  R . . .  programs were tabled .
In the reproduction and child health policy it has been emphasized on this thing that people should have the power to control reproductive force .
Women may be able to get safe conception .
Couple should be able to keep sexual relation without the fear of conception or disease .
Accordingly the mission of the ninth plan was kept that all the related programs of eighth plan would be unified .
The goal of reproduction and child health  R . . .  conceptualization is that according to the requirement decided by them high standard reproduction and child health .
Reproductive and child health  R . . .  is a unified program .
In this apart from other things the support of the organizations of Indian government and the support of external international organization of world bank and European commission etc are included .
It is the right of the citizens that good quality of reproductive and health services are available to them .
Therefore the mission of reproductive and child health program is to make available services of good quality .
So that for the citizens reliable reproduction and health can be ensured .
In this program the quality of the services have been clarified .
The quality of the services is that only which we want for our family .
The reproduction and child health program is completely centrally funded five year project .
There are some missions of the project - to bring reduction in the birth rate , infant mortality rate , child mortality rate and maternal mortality rate .
To bring reduction in the blindness caused by vitamin A .
Information for the prevention and treatment of infection produced by reproductive system and sex and protection against AIDS .
Increasing the rate of couple safety .
Complete care of pregnant mothers and children and increasing the rate of safe delivery .
Child protection services are .
Protection of children against six diseases tuberculosis , diphtheria , tetanus , whooping cough , polio and measles .
Five doses of vitamin A for protection against blindness .
Distribution of pills of iron , folic acid to children for protection against anemia .
Nutrition counselling and treatment related to diarrhoea and pneumonia in children .
Care of new born babies .
Services related to family planning .
Contraception services , temporary and permanent methods .
Abortion services .
Under the program of child safety services some activities have been implemented .
Essential care of new born babies .
Giving advice related to complete nutrition , right nutrition of child .
Imparting information related to the detection of the symptoms for the control of diseases of diarrhoea and pneumonia .
doing treatment and contextualising .
Information should be imparted of diseases produced by infection of reproductive system and safety against and treatment of AIDS .
Three in the districts of A category and one R . . .  S . . . clinic in districts with B category should be given the training of executive .
Under the reproduction and child health program the deputation of male and female doctors is being done after special training .
For the facility of tests on these units the facility of lab technician and essential instruments is being made available .
For holistic working of maternal and child welfare services sub - centres are being constructed .
Small scale and extensive work is being done at primary health centres and community health centres and district hospital in which delivery room , construction of operation theater , water fulfilment and electrical services are included .
There is proposal to give training to governmental and non - governmental doctors of Indian Medical Methodology working in rural areas by this their information regarding treatment and diseases related to maternal child welfare can be updated .
There is provision to give consciousness awakening training to the workers from the level of civil centres to rural level .
At present training is going on in all the civil centres .
For increasing the skill of the workers of various ranks skill enhancement training is being given .
The success of various programs is possible only after the advertisement of health education in masses .
This work is being executed in civil centres through the medium of district literacy committee .
In the rural areas sub - projects are being run .
in the sub - project the reproduction and child health program is being implemented in extensive form .
Urban R . . . Project is to be done in the six metropolitans of the country .
In order to make the workers , laboring  poor families living in the slums of Lucknow , Kanpur , Allahabad , Varanasi , Agra and Meerut benefit from health urban R . . . project is going to be started very soon by the Indian government .
Under this project reproduction related services would be provided to all the pregnant women , children up to five years and young girls through the medium of health post .
At every health post one doctor and two women workers would provide health services covering the population of 15000 .
Cluster Border District Project is proposed in the bordering districts Banda , Chitrakoot , Mahoba , Hamirpur , Lalitpur and Jhansi of the state .
The border civil centres are the extremely backward civil centres of the state .
the health directives are very pitiable in these .
The goal of reducing maternal - rate , mortality rate and infant mortality rate have been tabled under the project .
Strengthening of sub - centres .
The distribution of medicines through the medium of sub - centres is included .
This project would be started soon enough with the help of the directive instructions of Indian government and UNICEF .
In the health services provided in rural regions services related to motherhood is provided .
Under these services the registration of pregnant women is got done .
Under these services three important tests are done in pregnancy .
Along with quick registration in pregnancy the use of iron , folic acid are ensured for protection against and treatment of anemia .
In order to save pregnant women from tetanus two vaccines are given at the interval of one month .
In the pregnancy the difficulties are identified and accounted .
If complications arise in delivery then immediately she should be sent to such unit where the diagnosis and treatment of complications is possible .
It is essential that the care of woman post delivery is taken by female health worker .
If post delivery complications arise then the woman should be referred to the proper health unit .
The meaning of anemia is deficiency of blood in the body .
Maximum women are affected by anemia in India .
In the blood of anaemic women there occurs the deficiency of iron and folic acid .
Because of which the quantity of hemoglobin gets reduced in their blood .
In normal male and female the quantity of hemoglobin in blood should be 14 and 12 respectively .
In pregnant women this level is generally found less .
The detection of anemia in pregnant women is generally through some of these symptoms .
Due to anemia there is feeling of weakness in normal days .
Pregnant woman suffering from malaria may suffer from anemia .
Because of anemia the symptoms of the paleness of face , dark circles under the eyes , paleness of nails , whitening of tongue , vomiting , swelling in feet , loss of appetite , headache etc are found .
Among the anaemic patients in India the number of pregnant women is the maximum .
In normal condition on the occurrence of anemia the immune capacity of the body reduces .
There is fatigue and weakness in this but during pregnancy on the occurrence of anemia this becomes harmful for the woman as well as her prospective child .
Anemia is the chief reason for maternal mortality rate and infant mortality rate .
Due to anemia the weight of the new born baby may become very less than normal .
The new born baby may be born handicapped physically or mentally .
In anaemic women the milk is also not produced enough for the child .
The prevention and treatment of anemia .
Anemia chiefly occurs due to the reason of deficiency of iron elements in the food materials .
The requirement of iron elements in pregnant women is more than normal .
Therefore such substances in which there is more iron like vegetables , salad , jaggery etc should definitely be included in food .
In pregnant women whose level of hemoglobin in blood is from 5 . they have the requirement of treatment with caution in the care of the doctor itself .
One pill of iron should be given daily to pregnant woman for three months from three months after getting pregnant .
If the woman is pregnant before pregnancy then two pills of iron  one morning one evening  should be given to her for 100 days .
New born baby keeps getting iron in sufficient quantity from mother 's milk .
If any child is anaemic then normally it should be given one pill of iron daily after the age of 6 months .
One chief reason of anemia in women and children is the existence of worms in their body .
As for example if there is hookworm in someone 's stomach then the hookworm drinks 0 . millilitre of blood from his body daily .
Therefore for protection against anemia it is very important to give this advice that women  children should wear footwear .
For protection against anemia the vegetable etc should be eaten after washing .
In order to be safe from anemia keep the nails short and clean so because of which any type of worm does not enter inside their body .
For protection against tetanus two vaccines should be put at the interval of one month .
First vaccine should be given immediately on the detection of pregnancy .
Due to this both mother and the child to be born would stay healthy .
Before delivery at least three tests are extremely important before delivery .
Pregnancy has been divided in three parts .
First three months  trimester  - from the first day of the last menstruation to 12 weeks .
Second three months  trimester  - 13 weeks to 28 weeks .
Third three months  trimester  - 29 weeks to 40 weeks .
Normal pregnancy is from the first day of the last menstruation for up to 280 days .
Female health worker and maid should take proper care of the new born child .
If there are complications in the new born baby then it should be referred to the right unit .
For the treatment of diarrhoea of children the solution of O . . . Should be used by the female health workers .
Imparting information of O . . . to the family is important .
For the treatment of pneumonia in children the use of cotrimoxazol should be done .
It is important for every health worker to have information about nutrition .
Health workers should certainly make available information related to the nutrition to each family .
It is extremely important for the body to get protein , iron , folic acid , vitamin ' A ' and iodine in proper quantity .
In pregnancy the growth of foetus is possible only when the pregnant woman is healthy and properly fed .
Therefore during pregnancy the pregnant woman has the requirement of one and half times more food and rest .
In food protein , milk , fish , eggs , and cereals , various types of pulses , vegetables , peanuts and gram etc should be taken in sufficient quantity .
In women especially the pregnant women the use of iron and folic acid should be started quickly .
The pregnant women are made to use hundred pills of iron and folic acid for safety and two hundred pills for the sake of treatment .
There will not be complete benefit on the use of less pills by pregnant woman .
Vitamin A solution is extremely beneficial for children .
Five doses of vitamin A should be given at the interval of 6 months .
Due to this the child stays free from various diseases .
Because of the use of vitamin A solution on the occurrence of any disease even the intensity of the disease will not increase .
Vitamin A also protects from blindness .
Because of the deficiency of vitamin A the disease of night blindness occurs .
This disease night blindness changes into blindness later on .
Iodine is an extremely nutritive substance for body .
Because of the deficiency of vitamin A diseases like abortion , deafness in children , dumbness , mental retardation , physical handicappedness and goitre may occur .
In order to prevent these diseases it is essential that the use of iodine rich salts should be done in each family .
For family limitation various contraceptives are available at sub - centres .
In order to keep proper gap between two children I . . .  copper T  is implanted by female health workers .
Pills which can be eaten and nirodh are also distributed .
To couples having two or more children the advice of male or female tubectomy is given .
In men the facility of vasectomy is available without incision and stitches for free .
The detection of patients of diarrhoea , cholera , whooping cough , diphtheria , tetanus , polio , measles , tuberculosis , leprosy and malaria should be done .
The detection of patients of reproductive system infection , sex produced diseases and AIDS should be done and advice regarding protection and treatment should be given .
To keep record of birth and death in the region and informing village panchayat officer .
Because of cold affecting the child cold , fever , and cough happens .
If the treatment is not done quickly then pneumonia happens to the child .
On the occurrence of pneumonia if proper treatment is not done then the death of child may even occur .
According to the figures available in the hospital in the ward of children the reason of 13 percent of total infant mortality is pneumonia .
Therefore information of the status of pneumonia , identification of danger , treatment and where to refer the complicated cases is very important .
In the initial stage domestic treatment and in the situation of seriousness by referring to the right place many children can be saved .
many times due to the lack of proper information also the deaths of children occur .
The identification of pneumonia and management .
When the child has cold and cough both then pneumonia may occur to him .
the identification of pneumonia happens due to rapid breathing rate and movement of ribs .
With cough rapid breathing rate and movement of ribs .
Together with above symptoms fever , fatigued child , difficulty in breathing .
The methods of management may be the following .
Safe and proper medicine is available .
The treatment may take place at home by the mother .
The child has the need of treatment with cotrimoxazole .
There is need to refer the child .
While counting the rate of breathing special things should be kept in mind .
At the time of the counting of breathing rate the child must be relaxing or sleeping .
The child should be crying or in difficulty .
For this choose any peaceful place in the clinic .
For counting the rate of breathing the lower portion of the chest or back should be completely uncovered .
By using the seconds needle in your watch count the breathing rate in one minute .
How to identify fast breathing rate ?
In child of less than two months of age the rate of breathing being 60 per minute or more .
In child from 2 to 15 months 50 per minute or more .
In the age of 1 to 5 years of age in the condition of pneumonia 40 per minute or more .
If the breathing rate is more than the above mentioned levels then count again and finalize your diagnosis .
While seeing the movement of ribs keep in mind special things .
The meaning of the movement of ribs is that the movement of the lower part of the chest certainly towards inside with breathing .
Only the soft tissue between the ribs or the upper part of the collar bone goes inside with the breathing of the child .
This will not be called the movement of the ribs .
The movement of the ribs have been defined in the form of sub costal suction or pull .
The movement of ribs in small children is normal thing .
The sight if ribs very clearly  very deep and easy to see  may be the sign of pneumonia .
If you are doubtful about the ribs of the child then change the position of the child and check again .
If the body of the child is bent from waist then the decision of the speed of the lower part of the chest is doubtful .
Change the position of the child in such manner that he keeps lying straight in the lap of the mother .
Despite this if the movement of the ribs is not seen clearly then it should be believed that the ribs are not moving .
the movement of the ribs is important only when it moves continuously and is seen clearly .
If this is seen only in the unhappy state of the child or while it is taking nutrition and not in the state of rest then believe that there is no rib movement .
Symptoms of extremely serious pneumonia .
The child feeling more sleepy and difficulty in waking up .
The noise of throat clearing even when silent .
Production of sound in the breathing of the child or occurrence of fits .
Extreme malnutrition to the child .
Fever or feeling of cold on touching in very small child .
According to the rate of breathing treatment may be done at home or at health center .
In case of serious pneumonia admit the patient in the hospital .
In extreme pneumonia certainly admit the child in such a hospital or health center where the facility of oxygen is available .
Children less than two months of age in whom there is rapid breathing rate they should be treated for serious pneumonia .
Those children in whom there are symptoms of pneumonia and are malnourished they should be taken to the hospital immediately .
In order to escape from the danger of pneumonia inform the mother .
Keep the new born baby warm .
Feed only mother 's milk to the child up to six months .
To children older than six months give other substances apart from milk .
Definitely get the D . . . and measles vaccination at the right time .
Before touching , feeding milk and feeding food to children especially new born babies certainly wash the hands .
Control the fever with the paracetamol tablet .
Certainly give the right dose of antibiotic to children suffering from pneumonia .
Counsel the mother repeatedly , till the time it is not sure that the mother has understood this matter that it is essential to give special attention to children suffering from pneumonia .
If in the feeding of the child the nose is obstructing then for its cleaning  reduction of sticky substance  use salty water .
Give more liquid to the child to drink .
Remove the irritation of the throat and cure the cough through safe treatment .
For getting rid of cough lemon , honey , ginger , basil , hot water etc domestic treatment should be encouraged .
Nutritive food and clean water , hygiene and vaccination these are the three most important body protectors .
Protecting your child from several diseases these keep your child healthy .
There is deep relation between food and health .
With balanced diet balanced health is made .
before independence the situation of drought and hunger used to generally arise in our country .
Today due to the reason of mentionable achievements in the field of agriculture in the past decades the production of cereals , vegetables and fruits has increased many times .
But unfortunately in the country the rate of population increase has advanced faster than the rate of increase of cereals .
The growth of population has happened more in the section of poor people only .
Due to this some very well off people became unhealthy because of over nutrition .
That problem of malnutrition is looming even today in front of the maximum poor population .
Poverty and lack of purchasing power are chief reasons for malnutrition of a large section of population of our country .
There are some ill effects of malnutrition .
There is a deep relation between malnutrition and unhealthiest .
Because of lack of purchasing power of maximum population of India they are not able to take nutritious food .
They stay victims of under nutrition .
In such situation they also have to do hard physical labor for their livelihood .
Due to under nutrition the energy balance  negative energy balance  of their body reduces .
As a result their capacity to work reduces .
Due to undernourishment the disease - immune capacity of the body also decreases .
Due to this unhealthiest increases .
Malnutrition has very bad effect on reproduction and child health .
Therefore for reproduction and child health the knowledge of facts related to nutrition is essential .
The estimation of the nutrition status of any person is helpful in keeping him healthy .
Generally this is measured by the condition of the weight of the person , age , height , hemoglobin in blood and other elements .
Malnutrition only is the health problem - reason is not poverty but lack of information .
For keeping the child healthy there is need to have enough information to the mother and the family members .
Large number of children India are left malnourished .
While the things of their need is available in the nature itself .
For this there is no need of extra money .
The need is of the information that what should be the right diet to be given to the children by which the children may stay healthy .
the girls should also be given food equal to that of boys .
Abstain from food like alcohol , tobacco , excess oil rich food , excess chilli and spices , excess sugar and salt and excess tea , coffee .
the foundation of the health of the child starts from the pregnancy itself .
The kind of food which the pregnant woman gets the growth of the child also takes place according to it .
Thus , from pregnancy itself it is important for the child to get nutritional food .
Here the meaning of nutritive is not expensive food but food rich with vitamin , protein , and iron substances .
In what situation the food of the child may be cheap and nutritive ?
In pregnancy food should be consumed in the right quantity and nutritive .
In food eat such things in which iron elements , vitamin A and iodine are in rich quantity .
There is the need of vitamin A to the pregnant woman .
For eye sight there is the need of vitamin A to every woman .
Because of the deficiency of vitamin A night blindness may occur in pregnant woman and mother who has already fed milk  who has fed milk to child  .
If there would be deficiency of vitamin A in mother then this deficiency would be there in the child as well .
Due to this even the eye sight of the child may also go .
Due to the deficiency of vitamin A there is high risk of contracting other infections as well .
There should not be the deficiency of vitamin A by eating green leafy vegetables like lettuce , pot herb , mustard , cabbage , radish , gram lentil .
The fruits and vegetables of yellow color like mango , papaya , carrot and gourd are beneficial in removing the deficiency of vitamin A .
These things are easily available in rural districts .
Apart from this you can also take curd , cheese , eggs , liver in the food .
By giving the child nutritional substance along with breast feeding we make the child healthy and capable of fighting with the infections .
After one year if the upper arm of the child is less than 13 c . . then he is malnourished .
If it is less than 12 c . . then he is malnourished in the extreme form .
There is the requirement of iodine to pregnant women .
Due to the deficiency of iodine apart from the disease of goitre many other harmful conditions may arise .
Due to the deficiency of iodine the child may have mental retardation .
The child may be miscarried or may be born dead .
the child may be deaf or dumb .
There could be stiffness like paralysis in the bone of his knee .
Some quantity of iodine is obtained by us from water and vegetables .
Due to the reason of environmental pollution we do not get the proper quantity of iodine .
Always keep the iodine salt in closed vessel , not in uncovered vessel .
Because of coming getting air in uncovered vessel dampness comes in the salt .
Because of this the iodine mixed in salt does not stay in the proportion to the body .
What should be the proper type of food for child ?
In the life and growth of the child his weight at the time of birth plays a very important role .
In Indian conditions the weight of the child at the time of birth should normally be 2 . k . .
The weight of one third of children at the time of birth is found to be less than 2 . . . .
In infant mortality rate the number of children less than 2 k . . Is found to be maximum .
Children of less weight are born to mothers suffering from anemia .
The quantity of hemoglobin of mother at the time of birth is less than 8 then the weight of the child at the time of birth may be very less .
For such women there is need of A . . .
The child having less weight at the time of birth depends on the nutritional condition of the mother .
The nutritional condition of the mother depends on the financial condition of the mother .
The child having less weight at the time of birth are generally related to poor families .
On not taking excess protein the face stay swelled , decolouring of hair and skin , thinning of upper arm , flakes on the skin and hands and feet stay swelled .
Right from the time of birth it is important to give special attention to food for good health of the child .
In order to make the child disease free the child must get the first milk of the mother .
the child should not be given tonic , honey etc .
certainly make the child drink mother 's milk .
the milk of mother protects the child from diseases .
In the milk of mother there is vitamin A and all nutritive elements .
In the mother 's milk there are those nutritive elements which are not found in any milk .
Mother 's milk is food and medicine for the child .
Mother 's milk is beneficial to the child economically as well .
In sickness the child gets help from mother 's milk in becoming alright .
While feeding the child special attention should be given to the child for cleanliness .
The child should be fed till the time he does not start asking for food on his own .
Approximately 33 percent children are of less weight at the time of birth  less than 2 . kilogram  .
But within 6 months this rate remains 15 percent .
Such happens because in all the communities there has been validity of feeding up to six months of birth .
The child keeps getting nutritive substance from the milk of the mother .
The weight of children of the age group of 6 - 11 months and 12 - 23 months gets reduced  under weight  again .
Its first reason is that starting to give other food materials apart from mother 's milk long before six months .
Or else not starting to give any other food materials apart from mother 's milk even after six months .
its second reason is , due to the reason of infection increase in the rate of disease  morbidity rate  .
In order to escape from both these problems it is essential that the family members should be given the information about nutrition education .
Even after six months other food materials should be given together with mother 's milk .
Generally nutritive food materials should be given 4 . times in a day in balanced quantity .
For protection against diseases cleanliness especially the purity of the drinking water should be paid attention to .
the children of 2 . years generally start eating .
Due to this improvement comes also in children born with less weight .
The information of availability of nutritive substances at low price should be given to the families of children of this age group .
This information is imparted under various programs like woman and child development department and family welfare programs .
The children from 5 to 14 years of age generally come in the group of school going children .
They are distributed medical tests and nutritive diet under the mid - day meal program and school health program .
the children who do not go to school stay devoid of this .
In the ninth five year plan the registration of all the children in the school , continuation of the mid - day program and test of the weight of children and disease should be arranged .
In youth the physical and mental growth occur very fast .
In youth there is requirement of various nutritive elements .
Sufficient attention is not given on the nutrition of people of this age group .
Due to this here maximum become victim of under nutrition .
The wealthy section become victim of obesity .
Due to marriage or conception in young age generally anemia or reduced hemoglobin are found .
It ill effect is seen both on the mother and the prospective child .
To solve these problems information is imparted trough the media of the programs like health education , nutrition education and I . . . . Programme and R . . . program .
Nutritive food is the mantra for good health .
the strength to fight against disease is obtained from food .
The child of the body also needs this strength .
For this the most important are vitamin A and iron elements .
At least three to four times in a week the child should be given vitamin A rich food .
Every second day half bowl of lentils should be fed .
Due to this there would not be any deficiency of vitamin A .
Deep impact falls on the eyes due to the deficiency of vitamin A .
To keep a check on growth the weight of the children less than six years is also taken in anganbari .
Apart from this for the growth of children information regarding right upbringing , information of vaccination and knowledge of health is also imparted .
Apart from this here proper education is also given for the mental growth of children .
This way it has become clear that for pregnant woman and child there is no need of any such food which is very expensive .
In rural districts also the facility of anganbari is available .
the girls are also in need of that much of food as the boys .
generally it has been seen that in comparison to boys less attention is paid in the upbringing of girls .
It is said that later on boys have to earn .
The boys will only fulfil the major responsibilities of the house .
While apart from the responsibilities of the house the girls have to give birth to children later on .
If the girls are weak then post marriage their children will also be weak .
If the vicious cycle of early marriage and less birth duration is maintained then the prospective children would be weak .
Therefore how much important nutritious food is for boys that much it is also for girls .
Vitamin A has high importance for child .
New born baby gets vitamin A from mother 's milk .
On not getting mother 's milk night blindness may occur in children .
With the vaccination of measles the dose of vitamin A is given .
The virus of measles and chicken pox affect the stock of vitamin A of the body .
Generally the child does not die of measles or chicken pox but due to infections happening after that like pneumonia , dysentery , brain fever etc .
If pregnant women and their family members are given these informations then definitely mother and child may be protected from becoming the victims of malnutrition .
For protecting the child from malnutrition the requirement is not of more money but of right knowledge .
There are many forms of malnutrition .
By taking excess carbohydrate and not taking protein substance kwashiorkor .
Marasmus on not getting more food .  deficiency of everything protein , carbohydrate and fat   marasmus  .
Those children who do not drink milk or does not consume sunlight  vitamin .  various types of diseases may surround them like rickets .
occurrence of many diseases related to skin from malnutrition .
Swelling and bleeding in gums due to malnutrition .
In the past decades in India also many changes have come in the life style of people .
Due to the facilities at present reduction has come in the physical labor of man .
Because of this reason the problem of obesity has come up .
Because of excess food the quantity of many substances start reaching in the blood of man more than normal .
Due to this diseases like heart disease , diabetes etc start occurring .
In the society for this section also health education and nutrition education is to be provided .
Children like chicks should always keep eating something or the other .
At least three times in a day something or the other should be given to the children to eat .
In between meals snacks should be given .
Children should be given energy rich nutritive substance .
Breast feeding is complete food .
Till the time it is possible it should be fed .
Extra nutritive substance should be given to malnourished children .
For easy digestion the food materials should be cooked properly .
For making the food material energy rich little bit of oil  fat  should be added .
If you have to keep your child healthy then purchase nutritive substance , fruits , milk , eggs etc .
Do not buy tea , coffee , cool drink .
Under the reproduction and child health program the behavioural aspect and the prevention of diseases related to S . . .  R . . .  A . . . . have been included .
Many infections in reproductive system infection  R . . .  are produced by bacteria , virus and protozoa .
This infection occurs in upper and lower part of the reproductive system of male and female body .
S . . . and HIV . . . . occur due to R . . .
Every R . . . is not a sex produced disease .
There are some general reasons also for reproductive system infection .
the infections occurring due to the overgrowth of organs found generally in the reproductive system are called endogenous infection .
S . . . is the collection of communicable diseases .
This is spread by the unsafe sexual relations .
Such infections which occur due to insufficient medical processes like unsafe abortion , unsafe delivery or implant of I . . . by unhygienic method .
These are called iatrogenic infections .
HIV  AIDS is found in developed and developing countries .
The havoc of AIDS is justified .
the infection of R . . .  S . . . is found more in developing countries .
Its reason are biomedical , behavioural and social .
Maximum of these are in social transition period .
With increase of youth population urbanisation is progressing with even less restrictions .
Because of the discharge of foul smelling liquid from the vagina or in the condition of occurrence of itching , pain or inflammation R . . . or S . . . may occur .
In this situation the doctor should be contacted immediately and the tests should be done .
For I . . . the meaning of plan is that the goals and missions have been clarified .
There are two goals of I . . .
Communicable goals and goal collection .
The important element for developing good and effective message .
Marking the benefit of desired behavioural change .
Imparting proper rational knowledge in favor of the prospective benefit .
To make the message clear , not complex .
To mark main points .
To limit the thoughts in one material .
Whatever is the type of thought or message , it should have that type of emotion .
the message and knowledge should be given through reliable sources  persons .
What is the importance of family planning .
For healthy birth it is essential that the mothers who are giving birth to the child are healthy .
For the health of mother it is essential that balanced and nutritive food is available to them in required quantity .
With this only the health and population policy would be crated .
Such has been seen that in the second year of conjugal life the married women conceive .
there health starts deteriorating gradually .
Due to this reason only women start becoming the victim of diseases .
The effect of all these diseases falls on the yet to be born child .
Because of financial situation not being good the upbringing of the produced child does not take place correctly .
The arrangement of the education of children etc also does happen .
Because of the reason of population growth poverty , unemployment spread .
Because of the increase of unhealthy , sick children the store of below standard man power increases .
The main organ of family welfare program is mass health , especially mother and child health , nutrition , environmental health etc .
The couples should be provided with the advice of family planning , knowledge and services .
With this it can keep a gap in the number and birth of children desirably .
Those children who do not get children , getting them children after providing them with medical services is also under this program itself .
For producing children indeed there is joint partnership of male and female .
In the process of child birth the woman only has to face all the difficulties .
many methods are available to keep the family limited .
Some out of these are used by man .
Some methods may be used by women .
The permanent and temporary methods are used in family planning .
By this people can keep their family happy .
Vasectomy is very effective and the chances of its acceptance are maximum .
In this method the doctor does a small hole in the scrotal sac  scrotum  .
He ties both the tubes .
The technique to tie the tubes are as before .
This is called non surgical vasectomy because in making a hole in the scrotum knife is not used .
One goodness of this method is also this that the person does not have to stay admitted in the hospital .
Those clients who are getting non surgical vasectomy they have to take rest for just one day after returning home .
The facility of non surgical vasectomy is available in each district .
Temporary methods are those in which till the time the couple wants it can postpone pregnancy .
After leaving the use of temporary methods the establishment of pregnancy again is possible .
These methods are generally adopted by those couples who want late children .
Those who want to keep sufficient gap between children .
these methods may be used after union as well .
LAM  lactation amenorrhea method  - by feeding ony mother 's milk to the child the menstruation stops in the mother , in such situation it is called lactation amenorrhea .
LAM what is it ?
If the woman does not have menstruation and the interval of feeding the milk is not more than six hours then only by feeding own milk to the new born baby the conception of mother may be stopped for six months .
LAM does not let the egg be discharged every month .
If used in proper way then LAM is very effective .
When the child grows older than six months and it starts getting outer food and the menstruation of mother starts and the gap of feeding milk is more than six hours then the effect of LAM reduces .
Oral pills - these pills do not let the egg being discharged every month .
The pills make the mucus at the entrance of the uterus very dense .
Due to this the sperms fail to enter the uterus .
These pills do not interfere with the capacity or desire for sex .
You can stop its use on your own .
It does not save from HIV and other communicable diseases .
It regularises menstruation and reduces the flow of blood .
Contraceptive pills protect from some types of cancer .
These pills are not given to those women who are breast feeding child .
Initially there are mild discomforts like nausea .
It is important for woman to keep in min to have a pill daily .
Those women should take this pill after long deliberation who have high chances of the occurrence of HIV and sex related disease .
Latex condom is the only solution to escape from HIV and sex related diseases .
Those who breast feed children because in these there is excess estrogen which decreases the quantity and nutritive quality of the milk .
Those who can take the contraceptive pills uninterrupted .
She has the danger of getting heart disease .
There is complaint of diabetes .
There is high blood pressure .
Bleeding from vagina unnecessarily .
The treatment of epilepsy and T . . Is going on .  eating rifampicin medicine which is given to the patient of T . .  .
Those women should not use these pills who are pregnant or who have the chances of getting pregnant .
Those who have heart disease or has happened early .
those who are more than the age of 40 years of age and smokes cigarette a lot .
Those who have breast cancer or has occurred recently .
Those who have the cancer or tumor of liver .
One who has got jaundice due to the disease of gall bladder earlier during pregnancy .
What is the right method of eating pill ?
Eat one pill everyday at the same time whether there is copulation or not .
Do not leave eating the pill even if menstruation is going on .
Always start new packet after finishing the old packet .
If you forget to eat the pill ever then it should be eaten the moment it is remembered .
Apart from this that days pill should also be taken on the regular time .
By this two pills have to be eaten in a day .
If two or more days you forget to eat the pill then the moment it is remembered it should be eaten .
this much of time is used by the pill to be effective and then only one can escape from pregnancy .
If you are sick and there is more vomiting and dysentery then in such time the effect of pill reduces .
During this in order to escape from pregnancy do not copulate or use the alternative of condom .
Till the time dysentery and vomiting have not stopped and have taken the pill for 7 days continuously use condom till that time .
If signs of under mentioned symptoms become visible then immediately go to hospital or health center .
Paleness of eyes or face .
Intense pain in stomach .
there is high pain in chest , there is coughing , or breathlessness .
There is intense headache , giddiness , weakness or organ numbness occur .
Hazy or less vision .
Difficulty in speech .
Intense pain in ribs .
Injection  depo - provera   noristerat  - one injection is given to the woman in arm or hip .
This injection does not let the egg to be discharged from the ovary every month .
The depo - provera injection should be put every third month and noristerat injection every second month .
That woman who has just had delivery and one who is breast feeding the child first injection should be put to her six months after delivery .
Injection is not harmful for breast feeding mothers and children .
Those women who do not feed children injection can be put to them immediately after delivery .
That woman who has got abortion first injection may be put to her that day itself .
This is good alternative for that woman who has the desire for very effective way .
Who can come to the health center repeatedly to get this .
Who want to maintain the secrecy of the alternative of contraception .
those who can bear changes in menstruation like bleeding , irregular bleeding , bleeding for more number f days and in more quantity and stopping of menstruation etc .
This should be understood that after stopping the injection conception may take some time .  6 - 12 months  .
I . . .  copper . , multiload  is made of plastic and copper .
Doctor or trained worker implants it in the uterus of the woman .
It can be kept in that for three years .
I . . . does not let the sperm of the man and ovum of the woman unite .
The speciality of I . . . is that it is to prevent conception for long duration .
This does not put any difficulty in copulation .
Does not protect from HIV or other diseases .
After getting this implanted difficulties like unwanted bleeding , excess bleeding in menstruation and intense pain in stomach during menstruation .
All these vanish on their own after first few months .
IUD can be implanted or taken out only by trained doctor or A . . . nurse .
That woman who has just had delivery IUD can be put to her immediately till the time she is in hospital or after six weeks and any time after it .
It is not harmful for both the breast feeding mother as well as child .
The woman who has got abortion I . . . can be implanted that very day if there is no infection in uterus of the pregnant woman .
Such woman should use I . . . very carefully who has the disease of AIDS
Who has diabetes and the treatment has not been done properly or who is eating immunosuppressive medicines , which is given in cancer .
In such condition the risk of danger increases .
In whom the quantity of blood is less .  hemoglobin less than 9 grams  .
Who loses excess blood in menstruation .
Who has intense stomach pain during menstruation .
Because of this there is obstruction in his work and she has to take medicines .
Who has had aquopic pregnancy earlier .  baby in the fallopian tube  .
IUD should not be used by that woman who is pregnant or who has the doubt that she is pregnant .
That woman who has the complaint of diseases like excess water discharged from vagina , pain in stomach , gonorrhoea or calmidia .
Who is suffering from pelvic infection or has had it recently or occurs repeatedly .
Who is at risk of getting HIV or other sex transmitted diseases .
Who has the discharge of blood from the vagina without any reason .
Who has the cancer of uterus or has the risk of its occurrence .
Who has got infection  andometritis  in the uterus within three months after delivery or after abortion .
Who has had delivery now and whose amniotic sac has ruptured 24 hours before delivery .
There is fever or any other sign of infection .
Excess blood has been discharged after delivery .
Condom  nirodh  is a thin sheath made of latex .
After ejaculation the man removes the condom from the penis very carefully .
Every condom can be used only once .
The condom made from latex saves from HIV and other communicable disease apart from conception .
Apart from copulation latex is the only solution for protection against HIV and sexually transmitted disease .
Condom is available without any medical test or prescription .
The man may stop its use as per his will whenever he wants .
Condom sometimes get torn or hole develops in it .
To some people  whose number is very less  get allergy due to these .
Due to wearing condom difficulty comes at the time of copulation .
After delivery or abortion whenever the woman and her partner copulate , they may use condom .
This is the right alternative for that client which client is at the risk of getting HIV or other communicable diseases .
Apart from not doing sex condom only can protect from these diseases .
That which is good for her , that client who wants such alternative whose use she can stop on his own .
That client who needs some back up alternative .  As for example when the woman has forgot to take her contraceptive pill  .
That woman in whom other contraceptive option may prove harmful due to any disease .
That client who does sex seldom and does not need effective solution for long duration .
That client who is tensed with the side effects of other solutions .
That couple in which the man takes the responsibility of contraception and protection from sexually transmitted disease .
That woman who has just delivered child her partner can use condom whenever she wants to have sex .
Understanding ones reproductive work pattern the woman should identify those days when there is chance of her getting pregnant .
These days if the couple does not copulate then there can be protection from pregnancy .
In every month there are some days when there is chance of the woman getting pregnant .
This time is called fertile or unsafe time .
Doctor , nurse or the female health worker doing counselling helps the woman in identifying as to which days in the month are unsafe .
These days the woman and her partner should not have sex .
Rest of the days are safe and by doing copulation there is no pregnancy .
Among the permanent solutions of family planning there is only tubectomy .
After adopting tubectomy pregnancy can be stopped permanently .
Tubectomy can happen to anyone man or woman .
In this process the fallopian tube of the women and the vas of the men are cut and tied through surgery .
By this the sperms and ovum being produced from the reproductive organs of the men and women fail to9 do their work .
The establishment of pregnancy stops by this .
After two children tubectomy as means of permanent method is the best alternative to reduce the birth rate .
Tubectomy is a simple surgery for women .
In this surgery the tube of the women are closed .
The egg released from the ovary comes to the uterus through the way of these tubes .
When this path is closed then the woman does not become pregnant .
Tubectomy is a permanent solution therefore before getting it done the couple should discuss in detail whether it wants more children or not .
The doctor does the surgery of tubectomy in some hospital or health center .
After the surgery the woman is given some medicine due to which she does not feel pain .
After the surgery she gets menstruation as before bad she can have sex .
Female tubectomy is one of the most effective alternatives .
Due to tubectomy there is not any difficulty at the time of sex .
Tubectomy does not protect from HIV or other sexual diseases .
That woman whose tubectomy has happened properly she does not have the worry of becoming pregnant ever again .
Every surgery has minor risks like bleeding , infection etc .
The chance of any big risk is less in this .
After surgery the woman feels slight pain .
After some days everything becomes alright .
If after tubectomy the woman wants children then the surgery for opening the tube is not easy .
If the woman has taken the decision beforehand then tubectomy can be done 47 hours after delivery .
Immediately after abortion tubectomy can happen when there are no lethal microbe in the uterus .
What happens during the operation of tubectomy .
It takes even less than half an hour in it .
The woman is given an injection to make her numb .
Due to which she does not have any pain .
The woman stays in complete senses during the operation .
Then the doctor puts a small incision in her belly .
Tubectomy can be done through various methods but the most popular methods are - minilap and surgery through endoscope .
In minilap by putting a small incision on the extreme lower part of the belly does tubectomy .
After delivery woman 's uterus and tubes are in the upper portions of the body .
Therefore doing tubectomy is very easy .
In the surgery through endoscope the doctor puts an incision below the naval through which he puts the endoscope inside the belly .
Endoscope is a long and thin instrument through which everything uterus and tubes become visible .
Through the endoscope rings are put in both the tubes .
What happens after the surgery of tubectomy .
After the surgery the woman takes rest for some hours and then goes home .
She takes rest for some days at home .
She should not do any heavy work or life any heavy thing for at least one week .
That woman who has had tubectomy in the hospital after delivery can stay admitted for one or two days .
Tubectomy is the alternative for that woman who does not want more children .
Who wants a very effective contraceptive solution .
Other alternatives she fails to use or does not want to use .
Who wants a permanent solution taken once .
That woman whose delivery has just happened her tubectomy can be done within 2 or 3 days or 28 days after tubectomy .
If the client has not been counselled well or she has not taken the decision after getting complete knowledge then in such situation tubectomy should be postponed .
Between this she should be given some other alternative .
Those clients should get tubectomy done after very long deliberation who repent after the tubectomy is done as her age is very less .
She has few or no children .
Who has instability in the married life .
Who is getting it done under pressure of partner , family member or health worker .
Whose married life is not happy .
Who shows more eagerness in getting the tube opened after tubectomy .
Who decides to get the tubectomy done after getting stressed from delivery or abortion .
Whose partner is not ready .
Who has any such disease whose surgery may lead to danger like heart disease , diabetes whose treatment has not happened properly .
Before tubectomy it is important to get the treatment of these diseases like excessive deficiency of blood or bleeding disorder .
That woman who faced any problem at the time of abortion .
Such clients should get the tubectomy done after some time when all the dangers are averted .
That woman should not get the tubectomy done who has not been given complete information about tubectomy .
Who is pregnant , who has the infection of vagina , cervix or pelvis .
Before doing tubectomy the treatment of this infection is essential .
Male vasectomy is a very small surgery .
In this the tubes which are between the testes and penis are severed .
These tubes are called sperm carrier tubes or vas deferens .
Since after surgery the sperms are not able to reach the penis .
After doing the surgery the change of any type does not come in the strength or excitement .
After the surgery just like before there is ejaculation only there are no sperms in these .
That man whose vasectomy has happened he has no worry that his woman will gat pregnant .
There is no need to buy or remember any thing .
There are two ways of doing vasectomy in man .
By incising or without incision .
After the surgery by doing some rest the man goes home .
He does not do any heavy work for at least two days .
After this he does not life any weight .
The sperms made in the body before vasectomy is accumulated inside the man .
These accumulated sperms can also make the woman pregnant even after vasectomy .
Therefore for at least 12 weeks till the time there is ejaculation during sex for 20 times this couple should use any other contraceptive alternative .
The death of 11 percent of the woman becoming mother happens due to the reason unsafe and poisonous abortions .
In India abortion has been made a law legally in 1971 .
What is done in abortion ?
After ascertaining the status of the woman if she is found in the condition of abortion then the foetus born in her womb is removed in safe and clean environment by a person who has received qualification under this process .
In what conditions abortion should be done ?
If due to abortion there is danger of life to the woman .
There is chance of serious ill effect on the physical and mental health due to abortion .
If there is doubt of the child being born handicapped or the occurrence of physical and mental abnormalities .
If pregnancy is due to rape .
If pregnancy is the result of the failure of the contraceptive being used by female or male .
Where is abortion done ?
Abortion is done in government sanctioned health care centres equipped with essential facilities .
District women 's hospital  regional health center  primary health center where there is operation theater and trained doctors for M . . .
One registered doctor can do abortion only up to 12 weeks .
For abortion of more than 12 weeks and up to 20 weeks the advice of two or more registered doctors is required .
The choice of women for abortion .
Abortion should not be done 20 weeks after conception .
Haemoglobin should not be less than 10 percent in grams .
Any simple or serious infection should not occur .
There should not be any efforts of abortion at home .
There should not be serious diseases like high blood pressure , diabetes and heart diseases .
If in the woman any of the given situation are found then her treatment should be done in F . . .
After this only her abortion should be done .
Such women whose miscarriage has happened on its own , who have got medical womb termination then conception can occur again in these woman very soon if care is not taken .
In the first 3 months there is abortion but within two weeks there is again conception .
If after the termination of 3 to 6 months of womb the conception can take place even after 4 to 6 weeks .
Therefore if the womb termination has taken place within the first three months of then immediately contraceptive options should be adopted .
Immediately start the contraceptive oral pills .
Injection can be put immediately .
Copper . - immediately get it implanted if the abortion is of the first trimester , if there is no infection and there is no wound  hurt in the reproductive system .
Miscarriage of three to 6 months : after 4 to 6 weeks , get the copper . implanted and see that there is no infection .
Nirodh can be used immediately .
If there is no infection and excessive blood flow has not occurred then tubectomy can be done immediately .
Injection , copper . or tubectomy should not be done in high blood pressure and anemia .
The use of all these things should not be done till the time there is no improvement in the condition of the patient .
The copper . or tubectomy should not be done in the condition of infection or hurt , wound in reproductive organs .
Till the time the wound or infection has not become alright tubectomy or copper . should not be implanted .
The reproductive and child health services available at health centres .
these facilities are available in rural health sub centres , primary health centres . . . .  F . . . And district hospital .
The registration of maternal health and conceptions .
Making care available before birth in pregnancy .  at least 3 inspections  .
Finding about the mothers with anemia and treating them .
If there is danger to rural mothers then they should be referred to F . . .
Increasing in the proportion of home delivery by the trained workers in delivery education .
Increasing the number of institutional deliveries .
The arrangement of at least 3 post delivery inspections .
Supervision and care of new born baby .
If there is danger to the new born baby then referring it to H . .  F . . .
care and arrangement of unwanted conceptions .
Arranging M . . .
Identification and arrangement of R . . .  S . . .
The vaccination of children for T .  . . . . and polio .
Disease - prevention for reduction and prevention of deficiency of blood and vitamin . .
Through O . . . arrangement of the disease of diarrhoea .
When a healthy person does the following sexual activities with infected partner , then the transmission of disease happens in him .
For prevention against sexually transmitted diseases keep sexual relation with one partner only as far as possible .
Use condom .
Use sterilized needles  syringes .
Use HIV free blood .
The timely diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted diseases protects from the transmission of HIV
Identify the symptoms of sexually transmitted diseases  S . . .   reproductive organs  R . . .  .
The symptoms of these diseases in man are - inflammation on the penis , itching on the penis , swelling on the penis , wound etc .
The symptoms of the occurrence of sexual diseases in man are pus from urinary tract , swelling on the thighs , pain of testes  swelling as well .
The expected syndromes in men due to sexual diseases are - genital ulcer , urethral discharge , inguinal bubo , scrotal swelling .
the man should inform the male medical officer the moment the symptoms of sexual diseases occur .
Educate  counsel the person suffering from sexual diseases .
Make condom available to the person suffering from sexual diseases .
Identify the sexual partner and inspire for treatment .
After the completion of treatment inspire  counsel  again for behavior change .
Just like men identify the symptoms of sexually transmitted diseases and the diseases of reproductive organs in women as well .
In women also the symptoms of sexually transmitted diseases like inflammation on the vagina , itching in vagina , swelling on vagina , wound or pus from the vagina are found like men .
In women symptoms of pain in the lower abdomen etc . Are found .
the expected syndrome from sexually transmitted disease in women are - genital ulcer , vaginal discharge . . . .
The moment the symptoms of sexually transmitted diseases occur in women in form the female medical officer and adopt instructions .
HIV  AIDS is a lethal disease which is produced by HIV meaning human deficiency virus .
At present there are no vaccine or medicines for treatment for cure against this disease .
HIV is an acquired infection .
The infection is received by man due to his activities from outside .
When the person gets infected with this virus once then the virus starts weakening his immunity system .
there are many such microbes which stay in body and environment .
Due to normal immunity system of the body the microbes do not produce any harm to the body .
Because of the weakening of the immunity system of the person suffering from HIV  AIDS the opportunist infections make use of the situation .
These develop in the form of signals and symptoms meaning syndrome .
In India there has been only 11 years of HIV  AIDS .
In this very small time this disease has developed in the form of the most serious health problem of the country .
This disease has spread rapidly in its nearby areas .
In 1996 the joint cases of Maharashtra , Tamil Nadu and Manipur were 77 percent of the total cases of India .
50 percent out of this was reported in the state of Maharashtra alone .
According to the report the patients of HIV infection and AIDs are only few thousands .
There is huge difference between this figure and actual figure .
This infection has reached to the community by those people who keep adventurous behavior .
White blood corpuscles are our security warriors who destroy the microbes of diseases .
The active virus of AIDS destroy the white blood corpuscles because of diseases immune capacity is destroyed .
Out of every 4 women one has it due to which the risk of it getting spread in the new born babies has increased .
Ill effects have been seen of this situation on the child welfare and safe maternal program started by the government some years back .
Continuous reduction has come in the infant mortality rate and maternal mortality rate .
In this disease due to the rapid spread in mother and children ill effects can be seen .
The reason for the rapid spread of AIDS is the low level of literacy .
Due to the low level of literacy the group of dangerous behavior does not become aware and becomes the reason of the spreading of HIV
Sexually transmitted diseases , sex distinction , infection of the reproductive organs of males and female etc are the reasons of the spread of AIDS disease .
In the sexually transmitted method the transmission of HIV Be it sexual or oral happens due to unprotected sex .
In both the types of sexual activities there is transmission of virus from the infected person to their sexual partner .
Sexual activities be it with homosexual man with man or woman with woman , or straight man with woman , woman with man .
The transmission of HIV does not occur through the following - by shaking hands , by the patient using toilets , urinals , through mosquitoes and flies .
By drinking water and eating food from the same vessel as used by the infected patient also does not become the cause of the disease of AIDS .
The use of those swimming pools which are used by the patients HIV  AIDS .
By the use of joint goods like water , food , clothes , cups , glasses , plate , spoons etc .
The transmission of AIDS is not possible by the bite that mosquito which has earlier bitten the person infected with HIV
By looking after and serving the infected person .
By the embrace or kiss of the infected person .
By sitting close to infected Peron , coughing or sneezing .
AIDS does not even spread through blood donation .
If caution is practiced then AIDS will not spread .
If you abstain from sexual relation with unknown female sex worker and use nirodh then you can be saved from AIDS .
take immediate medical advice on even slight doubt .
The reason of not feeding colostrums  first milk  to the child .
Colostrums is thrown because people say that it is accumulated stale milk of 5 . months , this will harm the child .
Therefore in place of colostrums people give the first diet of tonic , milk , honey and water , powder milk etc .
First milk is beneficial to the child but what is the benefit it is not known .
To encourage mother so that she starts feeding the child her own milk immediately after birth .
What is colostrums ?
Why is it essential to feed colostrums ?
How should the baby be fed the milk so that the lactation can be fast ?
The first milk of mother is thick , yellow and sticky substance , which is called colostrums or first milk .
It is essential to give colostrums to the child .
Immediately after the birth  within 1 hour  certainly feed it your milk .
This thick and yellow milk is the elixir for the child .
The natural substances present in it save it from contracting dysentery , cold , cough etc diseases .
In this the vitamin A substance beneficial for the child is present in huge quantity .
It helps in the expulsion of the black faeces of the child .
Never understand this that the first secreted milk is bad or indigestible .
This is a wrong thought , on the contrary the substances which are quick to digest are found in more quantity which is suitable for the new born baby .
After delivery it comes out for two three days with the milk of the mother .
Many times the child is not able to suck the breast properly , but keep trying , it will very quickly .
Whether milk comes out or not let the baby suck both the breasts certainly for at least half an hour one after the other , do such many times , the mother will start lactating the very first day .
During the breast feeding the full part of areola  the dark portion around the nipple  should be inside the mouth of the child .
When the child will suck the dark part then the mother 's milk will be secreted fast and will be produced more .
Giving tonic , making honey lick , giving the solution of sugar and water to the new born baby are old customs and traditions .
Doing such is harming the child .
Do not give cow milk , buffalo milk , goat milk by mixing with water to the new born baby .
This may harm the baby .
Give to the child only the mother 's milk .
The common symptoms of the deficiency of water in children are increase of thirst , lack of tears , dryness of lips and tongue , becoming restless and irritated , drying up of the skin of the body , reduction of elasticity in them , if pinched then the pinch staying as before etc .
The serious symptoms of the deficiency of water in children are the child becoming unconscious , deepening of the eyes , dryness , lack of tears , becoming excessive weak , deepening of palate , excessive reduction or stopping of urine .
Approximately three fourth of the total weight of the body of children is water .
Due to the reason of dysentery the water and minerals from the body are lost which is called dehydration .
Due to loss of water and minerals in excessive quantity even the death of the child can take place .
Generally due to dysentery the child may become the victim of malnutrition .
Very less or less urine , the color of the urine becomes dark yellow .
There is sudden and rapid loss of weight .
The mouth becomes dry , the eyes become small and tearless .
The sign of pinch stays for long in the skin .
If the skin does not come in normal state after being pinched then the child is suffering from dehydration .
The microbes which cause dysentery harm the intestines of the body .
The power of the intestines to digest and absorb the food gets lost or lessened .
Due to dysentery the food comes out of the intestine without getting digested .
Due to this reason the intestines do not get time to absorb useful substances in food .
Due to this reason the child becomes victim of lack of nutrition or malnutrition .
Malnutrition reduces the diseases immune capacity of the body .
Malnourished child becomes victim of dysentery and other infectious diseases repeatedly and frequently y. .
This way dysentery from malnutrition and malnutrition from dysentery occurs .
With water as well many essential elements are removed from the body due to which malnutrition becomes even more sinister .
Simple dysentery that is when there is no sign of dehydration then for stopping the expected dehydration treatment can be done by giving domestic liquid items and easily digestible food materials .
In dysentery easily digestible things like chhachh , salted lassi , coconut water , lemon water , vegetable soup , fruit juice , shikanji , jowar water etc should be given in large quantity .
These thing can be given to children younger than two years every time one quarter or half glass and children older than two years every time one glass .
To grown up children give khichri , dalia , mashed vegetables , like potato and fruits like papaya and banana , rice , pulses , egg , fish and well cooked meat .
Some fat rich substance and oil may also be given .
Abstain from fibrous and spicy food materials .
Harm may also be done by the cool drinks and sweet sherbets of the market .
Keep a strict eye on the imminent dehydration .
Serious dysentery that is , dehydration to some limits .
When the signs of dehydration become visible in children then give them life saving solution .
Life saving solution is a diagnostic way of rehydration , is simple but effective treatment .
This fulfils the loss of water , minerals and other nutritive elements produced in the body due to dysentery .
Generally on the onset of dysentery medicines should not be given .
In abnormal situation on the advice of the doctor medicines may be administered .
According to the World Health Organisation the chief elements of life saving solution are - glucose anhydrous  20 gram  , sodium chloride that is , common salt  3 . gram  , sodium citrate  2 . gram  , potassium chloride  1 . gram  .
In order to escape from dysentery make use of safe water sources like - tube well , hand pump , tap etc .
Keep the edible things clean and eat from clean hands only .
Make use of the toilet .
At any cost do not keep the child thirsty in dysentery .
On the onset of dysentery do not feed the liquid substance from the bottle .
Make the liquid drink from clean glass and spoon .
Keep yours and your child 's nails short .
Do not feed the uncovered things of the market .
Among the ailments being produced due to measles one is dysentery as well .
Especially dysentery is very dangerous for the children .
Due to measles the weak child becomes the victim of the attack of dysentery .
This child unlike the other healthy children can not bear the disease of dysentery .
Even the death of child can occur due to this .
The pair of measles and dysentery bring the message of death for the small children .
The vaccination of measles should certainly be administered with the solution of vitamin A between 9 - 12 months .
By feeding mother 's milk to the child also the dysentery can be stopped , this is a natural diet , it is clean and hygienic .
Continue breast feeding while dysentery .
By the habit of washing the hands one can be escape from dysentery even .
Natural treatment has its own properties .
Cleanliness - there is a special importance of inner and outer cleanliness in natural medicine .
It is even said that the basic reason of disease in body is the accumulation of foreign elements in the body .
Clean and beautiful personality and place feels good to everyone .
Therefore the naturopathy doctors should themselves wear clean clothes , keep their body clean and keep the hospital microbes free .
The wards of patients , toilets , bathrooms , treatment rooms , sitting rooms etc should be clean .
The surrounding environment should be clean and natural .
Onset of hiccups is not a problem .
By the way , various experiments related to medicine have proved that hiccups are not any serious disease .
Generally hiccups come to every person and after some time stop on their own .
Many times by thinking continuously about hiccups the round of hiccups will start due to psychological reasons .
After all what are the causes of hiccups ?
Generally when we start behaving against any normal physical rule then the hiccups start .
Hiccups may also come by taking food more than required , by not chewing the food in sufficient amount , by eating hot and spicy food and by drinking very hot tea .
Apart from this , excessive alcoholism , tension , continuous laughter or crying are the other reasons of hiccups .
The patients of the mental disease like hysteria are also victims of hiccups .
The gas which is produced on feeding the child , that collides with the diaphragm and produces a strain in the nerve named ' phranic nerve ' .
Due to this strain also the children start getting hiccups .
From the point of view of physical creation the production of hiccups outline the anomaly produced in our respiratory and digestive system .
Like any other physical abnormality this information as well is transferred to the brain immediately .
Brain also produces obstruction in the respiratory system of the body , due to this spasms occur while taking breath , these spasms are basically hiccups .
Hiccups signify the deficiency of water in the body .
Generally after taking a glass of water the hiccups cease .
By the way generally after the passage of some time the hiccups stop on their own .
While many times a person keeps getting hiccups for several days .
Objectively sufficient research related to the cause and diagnosis of hiccups is due .
For the treatment of simple hiccup drinking water is enough because by drinking water the food particle stuck at the wrong place comes out .
Some domestic tips have also proved successful in stopping hiccups .
By chewing sugar mixed in mint one gets relief from hiccups .
Many times by licking honey one gets rid of hiccups .
By the smell of asafoetida also hiccup stops immediately .
Immediate benefit can be felt by making the patient smell sea salt mixed in ghee or water .
Benefit in hiccup is also felt eating boiled rice after adding ghee to it .
On the onset of the period of hiccup if some grains of sugar are swallowed then hiccups stop .
By pressing fingers in both the ears the hiccups stop .
Behind this treatment is the upsetting of the proportion of oxygen and carbon dioxide present in the body .
Whenever the quantity of oxygen will get reduced in the body , then veins and muscles will get fatigued and hiccups will stop on their own .
Actually the easiest way of escaping from hiccups is to show caution in eating habits and maintain the discipline related to food .
Orange is also a medicine .
Sensitive fruit orange is both sour and sweet .
Nagpur city of India is known especially for oranges .
The expansion of it cultivation is happening in the entire India due to its properties and use .
Huge quantity of vitamin . , potassium and iron is found in oranges .
Its glucose by dissolving rapidly gives instant energy to brain , heart and nerves .
Because of the presence of citric acid in orange its taste is sour .
The use orange is done in Ayurveda as well .
Orange is a strong germicide .
In the intestine after destroying the disease causing microbes it increases the friendly microbes .
By the regular consumption of orange one can be saved from common cold , running nose , cough , influenza , bleeding etc .
Orange cures piles , fever , sujak , nose bleeding , acidity .
In epilepsy and loss of appetite also orange is very beneficial .
By applying the paste of the soup of the peels of orange one gets help in making the breasts shapely and attractive .
Its pack enhances the beauty of the face .
One gets quick relief by applying the peels of orange and neem leaves after grinding on blisters and any type of wounds .
If the patient has to get himself treated , then , it can be done after staying in any natural health - center .
But everyone can not get the treatment done by staying in the hospital , and even these many hospitals may not even be opened every where .
Gandhiji wanted to change this awful situation , Therefore he established nisargopachaar in Uruli .
But today the educated and civilized man has kept himself deprived of the health - giving power of the nature in the hope of one 's own consumerism .
Leaving the natural life of the villages man created big cities and with it gave rise to various diseases .
Man must not have even imagined the artificial effort done for physical comfort will become the reason of physical diseases .
Together with unnatural life style the diet related artificiality has also increased .
In the villages established in the lap of nature and far from the wind of modern civilization man can consume the above mentioned five elements with freedom .
There he has no restriction , but at present in villages also lack of healthy life is visible due to uneducation and addiction .
Here in the small - big cities due to dense population the air , the after , the soil get polluted .
In the big cities maximum people have to stay deprived of the disease destroying and life giving rays of the sun .
The consumption of open sky is difficult .
Due to the habit of unnatural life for long time they are not able to bear even the open air , sunlight and water of changing weather .
The power of nature - consumption is not left in them .
For this they will have to acquire the habit .
The symptoms of cold by slightly cold air , body pain on getting wet in the rain , fever by walking in the sun become visible in them .
Their disease - immunity power gets weakened .
The people who spend life by taking good nutritious food also can not stay disease free .
But comparatively the person taking less nutritious food can also stay disease free by taking five elements in pepper quantity .
Together with balanced diet the five major elements can not be undermined .
Like the vegetation the man also needs to consume the five elements and to extract complete nutrition from air , water , food etc and for the body purification .
In the naturopathy treatment method especially the use of air , water , soil is done in various ways .
Therefore in this book the information of soil and water is given in special way .
From the point of view of treatment there is special importance of pure diet .
Through the five major elements together with treatment the use of less diet , very less diet and fast should also be there then only the patient can stay completely disease free .
By ignoring pure diet one can not expect to get alright only by the use of the treatment of soil , water .
By purifying the diet and by taking the benefit of only pure air , not by making use of water and soil one may get huge help in disease eradication .
the main symptom of chronic bronchitis is cough .
The cough of this type occurs due to the excess secretion of ' mucous ' in the respiratory system .
Smoking is injurious to health , it is not needed to tell this .
From smoking only arises ' chronic bronchitis ' .
In the disease of chronic bronchitis the lungs fail to work in a proper manner .
Smoking - the chief cause of chronic bronchitis is smoking .
In the people who consume biri , cigarette , chilam and hookah more its chances increase 4 to 10 times more .
The pollution occurring in the atmosphere also plays an important role in the disease of ' chronic bronchitis ' .
Industrial areas where there is more sulphur dioxide , nitrogen dioxide and dust .
In such regions the number of patients of chronic bronchitis is huge .
After the ' acute infection ' in the respiratory system ' infective focus ' also plays important role in the disease of ' chronic bronchitis ' .
In the industrial areas in the labourers working in cotton mill or plastic factory the chances of the disease of ' chronic bronchitis ' always keeps looming .
In the people coming in contact with carbonic and non - carbonic smoke also there is always a chance of the occurrence of this disease in them .
If the cough continues for two to three months in a year , then it is considered to be chronic bronchitis .
the cough occurring in this manner increases in the cold season .
If it treatment is not done in time , then in future one may have to face serious problems of respiration .
Then the person may also become the victim of asthma .
The patient of chronic bronchitis has to quit smoking forever .
This is also good for his family .
Clean and fresh air should be consumed staying away from excessive humid , smoky or else polluted atmosphere .
By the consumption of ammonium carb , anscenic , antim tart , hepar sulph , pulsatilla , nux vomica etc in homeopathic medicines on the advice of any doctor chronic bronchitis can be removed completely .
Knowledgeable people consider black pepper beneficial with respect to digestion .
Special thing is this that black pepper can be mixed with any type of spice .
While having food many people must have used black pepper together with salad or at times with dal .
One pinch of black pepper is used in many recepies .
Black pepper is registered even in history .
In the ancient age in Greece alonwith being offered to the God it was also given even in tax and ransom .
In the middle ages it was believed that the more one has black pepper the richer he is .
In Ayurveda black pepper is considered to be important antioxidant and antibacterial .
Many people using this in food are not aware of its benefits connected with health .
From black pepper the digestive system is benefitted .
Knowledgeable people believe that taste buds are stimulated with this .
It helps in the production of acid for the digestion of food .
In one way it strengthens the digestive system .
There are many benefits of tiny black pepper .
Due to this there is reduction in the gas being build up in the intestines .
Its consumption for long duration reduces the problem of sweating .
In the problems related to UTI as well there is benefit from black pepper .
In black pepper there are antioxidant aw well as antibacterial elements .
Studies tell that black pepper helps in making the oxygen reach to the brain .
Many important elements present in the food continue staying in the body through black pepper .
It strengthens the joints and respiratory system .
Black pepper reduces insomnia , disease of lungs , problem of liver , sunburn and pain of teeth .
In total you can not ignore the benefits being received from black pepper .
It becomes difficult for the mother to ascertain that the health of the child has become bad .
Such happens therefore , because your small child can not tell his problems on his own .
Therefore the parents only have to be careful about the health of their dear one .
You only to have to collect the information of the symptoms of the disease and keep an eye on the child .
As you see any abnormality in the health of the child , do not hesitate in taking immediate advice from the doctor .
It is very easy to identify the symptoms of cough - cold .
In cough - cold there is irritation in the throat and the nose runs .
On feeling heaviness in the voice you can easily identify this .
If the child cries a lot , then see whether his nose is blocked or there is any infection in his ears .
In such the child disagrees to take the feed or to eat or drink anything .
Cough - cold is produced due to a virus .
There is no effect of antibiotic medicines on these viruses .
Till the time the defense - mechanism of the body does not make itself capable of fighting that virus , till that time medicines can not do any harm to it .
More than cough - cold actually small children have more problem due to the obstruction of the nose .
Due to the obstruction in the nose breathing becomes difficult at the time of drinking milk or sleeping .
Learn the ways of getting the blocked nose opened from the doctor .
Your child can at least take the breath easily .
For opening the nose block the drops of salt water should be used .
Abstain from strong medicines .
Certainly give steam to the child in nose block .
Among the various causes of diarrhoea one important reason is rotavirus .
Due to rotavirus diarrhoea the deficiency of water in the body of child can happen quickly .
If the child even has the complaints of vomiting , fever or loss of appetite , then the water starts getting reduced in his body , which can prove to be lethal .
On the occurrence of diarrhoea take the doctor immediately to the doctor .
But during this time save the child from dehydration  deficiency of water in the body  .
Give the solution of O . . . to the child .
You can make the solution of O . . . even at home .
Keep feeding the child the solution made by mixing one pinch each of salt and sugar in water cooled after boiling .
By taking normal water salt gets reduced in the body .
The child may be given lemon water , kanji , rice water , coconut water , raw lassi , chati lassi , cheese water and juice made at home .
Through cough man tries to remove any type of irritation or excitement occurring inside the body .
The cough can be dry and phlegmatic as well .
For suppressing the dry cough certainly keep a bottle of medicine at home as advised by the doctor .
Phlegmatic cough should not be suppressed .
It works to remove the cough from the lungs of the child .
If the cough is thick and of green color , then for this take the medicine after asking the doctor so that the cough gets over rapidly .
In cough also it is beneficial to take steam .
With cough and cold also generally fever occurs .
Be cautious that the fever should not be high .
On the occurrence of fever reduce the clothes on the child and make him lie in airy place .
An easy way of lowering the temperature of the body is to wipe the body of the child with wet cloth .
Make the child lie on a waterproof sheet after spreading a towel over it .
Then squeeze a soft cloth after dipping in water .
Wipe face , body , armpits and limbs with this .
The brain of the child may get damaged due to fever .
Take temperature after every ten minutes .
When the fever reaches to 102 degree , then stop sponging .
If the fever is very high , then for sponging ice may also be used .
After sponging wipe the child properly .
If the boy temperature of the child again increases , then sponging can be repeated .
Jaundice occurs due to virus , which enters through the way of mouth .
Among the various reasons of jaundice in children one chief reason is hepatitis . .
The disease of hepatitis . occurs due to the swelling of liver .
Among the initial symptoms of the disease of hepatitis . mild fever , stomach pain and disinterest in food occurs .
After this paleness comes in urine , eyes and skin .
Bed rest is very important in jaundice .
In jaundice special attention should be given to diet .
In jaundice give such diet to child , in which there is high calorie , but there is no fat .
In jaundice give only veg protein .
In jaundice keep giving liquid diet in sufficient quantity .
Flu also occurs due to virus infection .
In flu the child gets high fever , pain in limbs and cough - cold .
In flu redness comes in the eyes and face .
On not getting the proper treatment of flu pneumonia may occur .
Do sponging when fever occurs , so that the fever is reduced .
In a recent research the researchers of the Michigan Health System University have found out that the treatment of disease like rheumatism is possible with the help of the green leaves of tea .
In this research one substance being secreted from the tea - leaves has been found out whose name is epigallocatechin . - gallate  EGCG  .
Researchers have found out that this substance produces the capability of defense against rheumatism .
Also with this it also compensates the loss occurring due to rheumatism .
Through this substance one also gets help in reducing the inflammation in the patients suffering from rheumatism .
According to the researchers our research will be of great help in the area of treatment of patients suffering from rheumatism .
During the research the scientists found out a tissue named synovial in people suffering from rheumatism .
Compounding then through tea - leaves the protein named psychotin was put in them .
By this action treatment of tissues infested with rheumatism is done .
In this research the scientists also investigated the effects of rheumatism on bones .
Together with this the researchers also believed that the properties of eradicating the pain of knee are also hidden in tea - leaves .
The researchers have to say that the EGCG substance found in the body , is produced from the substance named EGCG found in the tea leaves .
This EGCG substance compensates the loss occurring due to the disease of rheumatism .
The attractive and essential fruit of summer season is watermelon .
Essential because it compensates the loss of water in the body .
We should eat only those fruits more in this season which fulfils water in the body .
Watermelon keeps blood pressure balanced and removes many diseases .
There are many other benefits of watermelon like - by drinking the juice of watermelon after eating meal the food gets digested very fast .
Good sleep also comes by eating watermelon .
Because of the juice of watermelon there I no chance of being struck by loo .
For those reducing weight watermelon is a good diet .
Consuming watermelon for polio patients is very beneficial .
Watermelon increases blood and even purifies it .
For skin patients watermelon is beneficial .
In scorching heat when the head starts aching then half glass juice should be consumed after mixing in water .
If there is burning in urination then by drinking in the morning watermelon juice kept in ice after adding sugar one gets benefitted .
In summer by drinking cool sherbet of watermelon everyday the body gets coolness .
Also by drinking the juice of watermelon glow also comes on the face .
By rubbing the red pulpy peels of watermelon on limbs , neck and face beauty is enhanced .
In dry cough by eating watermelon the repeated cough is stopped .
By eating the pieces of watermelon after sprinkling black pepper powder , sea and black salt acvidity get stopped .
By walking in sun if fever has come then by eating cold watermelon kept in refrigerator there is benefit .
Take the pulp of watermelon and rub it on the area affected with ' black heads ' gradually .
After a minute was the face with luke warm water .
In indigestion , increasing appetite and in deficiency of blood also watermelon proves to be very beneficial .
Take a big watermelon and fill a gram of sugar in it after making a small hole .
Then till day keep that watermelon in sunlight and at night keep it in moonlight .
After that squeeze water from inside and keep it clean bottle of glass after filtering .
Drinking this liquid substance in the quantity of one fourth cup two times a day there is huge benefit in madness , brain fever , hysteria , amnesia etc problems .
Very beneficial is the soup of the seeds of fenugreek .
The seeds of fenugreek have been considered to be a very beneficial substance .
The seeds of fenugreek are helpful in removing many types of disease and there are many benefits of his .
The soup of the seeds of fenugreek gives benefit to the patients of diabetes and blood pressure .
At times the patients can not bear the allopathic medicines which reduce cholesterol .
In such if they drink the water of tea after adding small quantity of soup of fenugreek then there would be relief .
It is said that if during pregnancy the seeds of fenugreek are eaten or its soup is consumed two or three times then after the birth of the child the child will get milk in sufficient quantity .
You will be able to feed milk to your child in proper quantity and there will not be lack of milk .
Come let us tell you an easy way of making the soup of the seeds of fenugreek .
Boil two tea spoons of the seeds of fenugreek in a cup of water .
Let it boil for ten minutes on mild flame .
Now remove this soup from the burner .
Take this soup of fenugreek three times a day after getting cooled .
If you have the complaint of stone then in winters drink fenugreek water first in the morning .
This soup of fenugreek helps in dissolving the stones .
Breastfeeding for long time , more intelligent children .
In a recent study us has been found out that those children who drink mother 's milk for long time , they are more intelligent .
This thing has been said on the basis of research done on 3,253 women and men of Denmark .
Specialists have to say that those children who drink mother 's milk for at least nine months they are more intelligent in comparison to children who are breastfed for less time .
If we see the level of mental growth of children becoming adults for twenty years then it is known that the mental growth in children breastfed for long time is occurs rapidly .
Commercial henna can also be dangerous .
Through a recent research it has been known that in order to make the color of henna bright many companies add chemical substances like ' para phenyl diamine ' in chief form .
The scientists of the dermatology center of ... ... ... ... ... .. . Of Germany have said in their research that actually henna is not harmful in itself .
But the chemical substance named ' para phenyl dianmine ' mixed in the henna being obtained from the market is harmful to the skin .
In this research the women using henna on hair and palms have been warned that they should be cautious in making use of henna .
Recently a group of doctors of ' Palermo University ' found in their research that by drinking cow milk the complaint of constipation and stomach pain may arise in small children .
The doctors of ' Palrmo University ' came to know that the above mentioned problem of 68 % children got removed quickly , when they were fed the milk obtained from soybean in place of cow milk .
These doctors had done research on 65 children from 11 months to 72 months , who were suffering from constipation .
According to these scientists in these diseases there could be psychological reasons also .
As far as possible the main cause of constipation is the milk of cow alone .
Who is not familiar with the green fragrant leaves of mint .
With the onset of summer there is the blooming of mint .
Apart from Vitamin . . . . , and E iron , phosphorus and calcium are also found in rich quantity .
The use of mint in summer is very beneficial .
Together with being digestion enhancer it also rescues from the heat of summers .
The juice of the leaves of mint , sap and oil are brought in use .
The effect of mint is cold .
Mint is beneficial medicine for the diseases of stomach .
Mint with small leaves is fragrant and perfumed .
Mint is the destroyer of cold , cough , asthma , indigestion , afara , colic , dysentery and worms .
By putting the pack of leaves of mint after grinding the pimples and blemishes are removed .
The gastritis and wind problem of stomach is removed by drinking one spoon mint juice after mixing two spoon honey , one spoon lemon juice .
After boiling the leaves of mint in water by rinsing the mouth on cooling the foul odour of the mouth will go and freshness will come .
By eating mint leaves with fig the hiccups stop and the accumulated cough in the chest gets cleared .
By taking steam after boiling mint leaves there is benefit in cough - cold .
One whom poisonous organism has stung , put pack there after grinding mint .
By making 10 gram mint and 20 gram brown sugar drink after boiling in water the disease gets removed .
By making the juice of mint drink there is quick relief in diarrhoea , dysentery and vomiting .
By applying mint pulp on wound the wound gets healed fast .
In nausea there is relief by eating mint after grinding adding lemon juice and black salt .
In nose bleeding drink cold water after adding the sap of mint .
By doing continuous consumption of mint chutney one gets full appetite .
There is benefit in indigestion , stomach disorder and acidity by drinking mint and munakka by drinking it after filtering by soaking them for the entire night .
The consumption of mint is beneficial in the ailments of urine .
Boil 6 grams mint and 3 grams cardamom in a glass of water .
By making drink little repeatedly the complaint of indigestion , nausea and intense thirst is removed .
About exercise generally everyone knows that the exercise being done daily makes the muscles flexible .
Exercise keeps the body too healthy .
With increase of age on feeling physical tiredness the person generally either reduces exercise very much or stops it completely .
But health specialists have to say that such aged , who due to any reason do not exercise daily , they should at least exercise once a week by taking out time and by showing a little will power .
By doing exercise the work efficiency of aged people are maintained .
By doing exercise for their daily work the aged people do not require the support or assistance of anyone .
Happiness - sadness is the cycle of nature which keeps moving .
Because of being a social organism man shares happiness - sadness with each other .
Sharing other 's sadness is also an art .
therefore it is said that in sadness or sickness do not become a problem for the other , but be his support .
Before going to meet a patient certainly keep in mind some things .
On meeting the patient do not talk pessimistically , but do optimistic talk by which the patient can recover mentally .
Try that if you are going to meet the person who is recovering then do not take children with you so that there is no trouble to the patient .
If you are going to meet the patient in his house then keep in mind that it should not be the time of his meal .
During afternoon maximum people take rest therefore never ever go to inquire about his health at this time .
Go to meet the patient late at night .
Do not ask the disease of the patient forcefully .
If possible then do not use more instructions .
Where it is very important for the patient , there only instruct .
Do not discuss someone else 's disease with the patient .
If the patient is very ill and the doctor has advised anyone not to meet then do not forcefully true to meet him .
In such be content by asking the well being with the family members of the patient .
If the family members of the patient start showing formality of snacks - tea then stop them .
When going to meet the patient in hospital or nursing home keep in mind the time of meeting the patient .
Do not take flowers etc for the patient through which there could be infection .
Before taking anything for the patient to eat ask the family members of the patient as to what will be suitable for the patient .
If possible then on advice of the family members take the responsibility of looking after him by staying with him during day or night .
By this his family members will also get a chance to relax .
Do not sit closely with the patient on his bed .
The microbes which are bought by us may trouble him .
During changing his clothes , during feeding , while administering medicine , while giving bath , while waking him up or making him lie wash your hands with soap properly .
Take full care of the comfort of the patient .
if the patient is sleeping or taking rest then do not try to meet with him .
Do not give more instructions to the family members of the patient but assist them .
If possible then enquire about the health from the family members over phone .
This way by your little carefulness the problems of the others would be reduced .
Alzheimer 's is one such disease or state of brain in which continuously nerve cells or the cells of brain keep dying gradually .
Due to the destruction of the cells of brain the work related to memory , changes come in them .
Due to the destruction of the cells of brain alterations come in the behavior and memory .
In maximum cases the disease of Alzheimer 's starts showing its impact after middle age .
But it has also come to be seen that Alzheimer 's also affects people from 40 to 57 years of age .
Alzheimer 's disease has also been seen on hereditary levels .
Mainly three stages have been seen of Alzheimer 's .
First stage - loss of memory , delusion , reduction of judgement , loss of interest towards things or people , repeated forgetfulness , difficulties in daily life , irritation etc .
Second stage - restlessness during evening time , increase of delusion , weakening of memory even more , not feeling the sensation of heat and cold , loss of control on excretion , repeating the words several times , anger , quarrelling , becoming obstinate , loss of hair .
Third stage - speaking words with difficulty , not recognizing family members , friends and close relatives , complete dependence on others , absolute no control on excretion , increase of sleep disorders , incompetence of getting up and sitting , comma at the end .
Why does the disease of Alzheimer 's occur , its absolutely correct cause has not yet been known .
Although some dangerous chromosomes of Alzheimer 's have certainly been known .
the danger of increase of the disease of Alzheimer 's increases with age .
For example if any person in the family has Alzheimer 's , then his blood relatives can also be at that much big risk .
Due to hereditary reasons Alzheimer 's generally shows its impact in the age of 35 - 60 years .
For the treatment of Alzheimer 's or to be saved from it improvement in blood circulation can be an effective medical treatment .
Such medicines are available , by which the loss in the mental capacity can be lessened .
In the initial stage of the disease of Alzheimer 's the depression of the treatment can be treated but not for long time .
Behave normally to the patient of Alzheimer 's , do not make fun of him .
be compassionate towards the patient of Alzheimer 's and keep patience .
Keep within the reach of the patient the things which come to use daily like spectacles , watch and denture .
Do not keep any sharp or dangerous object like knife etc near the patient of Alzheimer 's .
The bed of the patient of Alzheimer 's should be comfortable , good sleep can come to him .
Listen to the talks of the patient of Alzheimer 's attentively .
Behave with love and compassion with the patient of Alzheimer 's .
While sleeping there is risk of the patient falling , therefore do not make him lie on high bed and the bathroom should also be close to the bed .
Do not argue with the patient of Alzheimer 's and do not leave him lonely .
Be very careful about the safety of the patient of Alzheimer 's .
Such patients should be inspired for pranayam , yogasadhana and exercise .
Medicines like Brahmi powder or Brahmi Vati , Shankhapushpi powder , Ashwagandha powder , Brahmi oil , Jyotishmati oil , Kushmandadhool etc . are fruitful in the alzheimer 's disease .
By exercising , reduction in the quantity of cholesterol and controlling high tension protection from Alzheimer 's can be done efficiently .
The disease of Alzheimer 's can be pushed a little more back by antioxidant , vitamin and good diet .
If people be careful in the beginning , then one can be safe against Alzheimer 's disease .
For body the main source of energy is carbohydrate .
In maximum food materials there is carbohydrate , which the body changes into sugar .
For doing any work we get energy from carbohydrate alone .
In food materials two types of carbohydrates are found - simple and complex .
Simple carbohydrate is found in white sugar , fruits and milk .
Therefore the consumption of fruits and milk should be done .
Because in this there are nutrients like vitamin , fiber and calcium , which are not available in simple sugar .
Complex carbohydrate is also called starch .
In complex carbohydrate maida , white bread , white rice , pastries , pasta and junk food etc are included .
Consume complex carbohydrate rich substances less , because these substances digest late and produce the complications of constipation etc .
Due to substances rich in complex carbohydrate the problems of pimples etc are produced .
Instead of low carbohydrate consume good carbons like - whole cereals , pulses , fruits , vegetables and sauce .
On the occurrence of fungal infection you must have seen many people applying henna .
henna gives cooling effect and also functions as astringent .
Apart from this henna is useful in reducing the temperature of the body , curing headache .
henna is also useful in removing the inflammation of the legs .
It gives relief in problems like excessive sweating in palms .
In many Oriental countries the use of henna is done in the form of medicine .
In Morrocco in order to keep the house cool the residents even paint the door of the house with henna .
In henna there is one such chemical which is helpful in leprosy , small pox , headache .
Henna is useful in removing problems like burnt skin , wound and eczema .
If there is fever , then apply the paste of henna in palms , fever will lower fast .
In a new study it has been found that during pregnancy the chances of the children suffering from asthma is more for women who stay tensed .
According to the researchers of Bristol university if during pregnancy the women are treated for tension then the cases of asthma can be stopped from increasing .
In Britain 10 lac children and 40 lac adults are suffering from patient .
According to the chief researcher Professor John Handerson . Due to tension only many types of hormones get secreted in our body whose effect is seen on the child and its immune system during pregnancy which spreads in the form of disease like asthma in future . .
In this study 14 thousand children of 5800 families were included .
The researchers had asked questions even to the mothers of these children .
Whenever a person is ill , then he knows that which medicine he has to take and how much to take .
It is also important for him to know that when it is beneficial for him to take the medicine .
If the disease is in the lower part of the body , then the consumption of medicine before the meal is beneficial .
If the body is to be thinned , then the medicine should be taken before meal .
In the ailments of stomach , abnormalities of bile the use of medicine should be done in the middle of the meal .
Strong people should generally take the medicine empty stomach .
For the upper parts of the body the medicine should be taken after the meal .
Medicines for cough produced ailments and to make the body fat should be taken after the meal .
Boys , girls , fragile and those hating the medicine should take it with the meal .
In respiratory diseases , cough , intense thirst , vomiting and poison related diseases the instruction is to take the medicine a little after meal .
In diseases of ear , nose , throat and eyes it is beneficial to take the medicine before going to sleep at night .
Weak and people observing fast should abstain from medicine .
The consumption of medicines which are repulsive and of intense smell can also be used before meal .
Children actually jump around enough the entire day then why do they need to exercise ?
If you also think such and do not inspire your child for exercise , then in one way you are compromising with his growth .
The university of Illinois did a study on the physical education and exercise in children and discovered its multiple benefits .
It was found in the study that positive influence can be seen on the study of the physical education class , exercise program in recess time and after school .
The study done by professor of community health Charles Hillman says that physical education enhances the ability of the student to concentrate .
Prof . Hillman said . the aim of this study was to know whether light exercise like , walk can even have good impact on the health of child . .
During the research the study was done on three bases .
During this a positive link was seen between physical activity , concentration and academic achievement .
In the study 8 girls and 12 boys of 9 years participated .
In order to know there control power many stimulus tests were done .
In the research it was seen that children who walked everyday did the test in better way .
So far that even to complete difficult challenge these students did less mistakes .
It was also seen that even in the midst of noisy environment these students were able to do the work with more concentration .
Because of all this much improvement was seen in the reading , spelling and maths .
Mobile phones which are becoming the integral part of the modern lifestyle may also become the cause of the spread of disease .
Here in the study of the mobile phones of the workers of ' Washi ' situated MGM hospital this fact has come up .
In the study the phones of more than 82 percent of the workers of the hospital have been found to be the carriers of the microbes and spores of contagious diseases .
By this there is chance of the occurrence of skin disease , food poisoning , acne - blisters , toxic shock syndrome and other diseases .
In this study done by the Indian Medical Research Council 120 mobile phones of the workers were tested .
The researcher Dr . Nikhil Tambe final year M . . . . student of MGM hospital found that bacteria and spores were found on 99 phones out of them .
This bacteria together with making the disease of the patient serious also become the cause of the delay of the cure .
Tambe said that the presence of the maximum number of bacteria were found in the phones of the technicians .
After this the mobile phones of ward boy , nurse and then doctors were found infected serially .
Dr . Chitra Pai , chief of the microbiology department of the hospital said that on the mobile phones maximum 54 . percent ' staphylococcus accrues ' bacteria were found .
This microbe can become the cause of skin disease .
Apart from this in mobile phones microbes like E - Coli and pseudomonas were also found .
Due to the infection of E - Coli and pseudomonas microbes maximum ill effect is seen on the health .
Two years back in a study done in Coimbatore the presence of 96 . percent microbes was found on the phones of hospital workers .
First let me tell you as to what are antioxidants ?
As our age passes some or the other type of loss occurs in our body .
We generally see that some people appear old before age while some appear comparitively young even at the age of 80 years .
The answer to this is with modern medical science and this answer is the deficiency of antioxidant in our food .
All around us there is pollution , tensile environment and many among us smoke cigarette actively .
All this speed up the process of destruction in body after uniting .
Even the diseases of the heart to great extent can be due to this destructive process .
Just like the rust on the iron exposed in air  which occurs due to oxidation  the cause of the destruction in the body is also oxygen and tissues  the chemical reaction of the enzymes .
The accumulated fat in the arteries of the heart  L . . . Cholesterol  gets oxidised before getting accumulated .
Antioxidants are micronutrient substances which stop the destruction occurring in the tissues and organs of the body .
Therefore these have immense capacity to keep the disease of the heart at bay and for its treatment  reversal  .
Along with antioxidants there are other substances as well which are essential to make the food complete which help our heart and other organs and make our body healthy and increase the immune capacity of our body .
This collection of the information of heart , throw light on these food making it complete .
This is the wonder food of future antioxidants .
In continuous fast life generally man is left devoid of nutrition or else stays dependent on diet consisting of less nutrition .
In this relation can we think something for ourselves or our family instead .
This is that portion of knowledge related to nutrition which has been specially created for us .
Every capsule of this knowledge give us information about vitamins and minerals , which are important for our health .
What are free radicals ?
In what way do these harm human body ?
In what way Vitamin E and other antioxidant nutritive substances protect the body from the destruction of free radicals .
We will try to give answers to these questions and will tell that fruits and vegetables rich in 5 . types of antioxidants may be beneficial for your health .
For the knowledge of this thing that how free radicals and antioxidants react with each other , little bit of knowledge is essential in the subject of tissues and molecules .
Physiology , for the revision of chemistry brief chapters have been given here .
Human body is made up of various types tissues and tissues are made up of various types of molecules .
In molecules there may be one or more atoms which remain tied due to chemical bond .
In atom there are nucleus , neutron , proton and electron .
Electrons participate in chemical reactions and keep the atom tied in the form of molecule .
Electron keeps the atom surrounded in one or many shells .
Certainly oxygen element is extremely important for life , but in some conditions it is even harmful for human body .
Due to the reactivity of oxygen many harmful compounds are formed .
These are called the compounds of reactive oxygen species .
Reactive oxygen compound give oxygen to other substances according to their own nature .
Many out of these reactive species are free radicals and consist of one or more extra electron .
This way because of the lack of similar compounds it is the cause of instability and extreme reactivity .
Oxygen atom is the cause of the reason of ageing , heart disease , stiffening of the artery , the reason of loss of immune capacity , damage of free radicals .
Due to these losses the conditions of stiffness of the arteries , diabetes , cataract and premature agreeing arise .
The contribution of antioxidant is extremely effective in the prevention of cancer , heart disease , Alzheimer 's disease , rheumatism and cataract .
Together with different oxidants these work in different cellular compartments .
The system of enzyme is an important aspect of immunity capacity , glutathione peroxidise , superoxide dismutase and catalase etc which reduce the accumulation of some harmful oxidants in the tissues .
Some essential minerals are - selenium , copper , manganese and zinc etc are essential for the production of the activity of the live enzymes .
Another security line of the immune capacity of the body towards the harm of the free radicals is the presence of antioxidants .
Antioxidants is a molecule which is at least so stable that they can give one electron to free radicals and make them inert so that their capacity to harm is lessened .
Some antioxidants of this type are antioxidants , glutatione ubiquinol and uric acid which are produced during the normal metabolism of the body .
Though till now around 9000 antioxidants have been detected .
The most popular antioxidants are Vitamin E , VitaminC and carotenoids .
Tissues of oxygen free radicals  oxygen free radicals  are produced during digestion .
These poisonous molecules of tissues are produced in the body due to the cause of the light of the sun . - ray radiation , food , tobacco or the smoke of car and other pollutants of the atmosphere .
In fact these free radicals harm DNA that is the ones providing hereditary characteristics .
Microbes convert chemical compounds and at times completely destroy the tissues .
With the help of antioxidants the compensation of this damage can be done .
In which way can the antioxidants protect from the harm occurring due to the frss radicals ?
The ones providing immunity are the antioxidants substances .
As it is clear from the name antioxidants are those substances which stop the destruction occurring in the body and normalise the oxidation process occurring in the tissues of the organisms .
These nutritive substance  vitamin and mineral  are enzymes  the supportive protein in the chemical reactions situated in the body  .
It is believed that these protect from the ill effects of the free radicals .
By donating their personal electron the antioxidants depress the process of stealing electron by the free radicals .
After shunning the electron also they do not become free radical because in themselves they have stability .
Antioxidants stop the process of oxidation , by deactivating the free radicals .
In doing such the oxidation of them takes place .
Therefore the sources of antioxidants have to be maintained uninterrupted .
Though you take multivitamin regularly , consume extra VitaminC , many types of fruits , vegetables , then also it is not essential that you are getting sufficient antioxidant .
With respect to these nutritive substances fighting cancer , health enhancer specialists have given opinion .
here such substances are being named which should be taken in daily breakfast .
Among the antioxidants given daily there are VitaminC , vitamin E and selenium .
Vitamin E is found in two types tocopherol and trocotreinol .
If you are taking any vitamin E then it would be tocopherol because at present tocopherol is under research .
What does tocopherol do ?
Tocopherol protects from heart disease , stroke , Alzheimer 's disease and cancer .
The immune capacity also increases with tocopherol .
Trocotreinol fights against heart disease , breast cancer , it also protects the skin from ultraviolet radiations .
Where is tocopherol found ?
In less quantity tocopherol is found in almonds and vegetable oils .
Trocotreinol is found in the husk of rice .
For therapeutic dose the need for other complementary substances arises .
The dose of natural Vitamin E has been suggested in the form of 400 to 800 I . . Of mixed tocopherol .
What does selenium do ?
Selenium protects from cancer , heart disease , cataract , muscular degeneration and is supportive in the function of other antioxidant .
Where is selenium found ?
Selenium is found in brazil nut , cereal , vegetables and its quantity various according to the regional soil .
In the suggested dose 100 to 200 mcg of selenium with food or even without food daily .
Do not take selenium in large quantity otherwise poisoning may occur .
Start taking antioxidants after the age of forty years .
If before the age of 40 years you have to take many pills then you should not take coenzyme Q - 10 alpha lpoic acid .
Coenzyme Q - 10 fights against cancer and heart disease .
Coenzyme Q - 10 makes the gums strong , protects nerves , is helpful in energy production .
Where is coenzyme Q - 10 is found ?
Coenzyme Q - 10 is present in each tissue of body , specially in heart .
Coenzyme Q - 10 is also found in almonds and oils but for medicinal dose extra quantity may be needed to be consumed .
In the suggested dose with daily food 30 mg of coenzyme Q - 10 specially , is important for heart patients .
What does alpha lipoic acid does ?
Alpha lipoic acid protects from the nerve damage related to heart disease , cancer , cataract , stroke , diabetes .
Alpha lipoic acid increases the level of glutathione .
Where is alpha lipoic acid found ?
In some food substances very little quantity of alpha lipoic acid is found  example lettuce , meat , potato etc  .
In the suggested dose 100 mg quantity of alpha lipoic acid with food , 200 mg everyday can be taken by people suffering with diabetes .
What is the sufficient quantity of nutritive substances ?
In 1941 American Food and Nutrition Board decided the quantity of various types of nutritive substances after guessing the quantity of nutritive substances , the protection of body through nutritive substances , through figures after studying the scientific history .
For each type of nutritive substance the board has decided recommended dietary allowance  RDA  which is 98 % diet for healthy people , which the body can easily accept .
Tolerable Upper Intake Level  UL  - is that quantity of nutritive substance which a healthy person can consume everyday without any harm .
Only in some cases the board could not decide yet that how much quantity of nutritive substance would be beneficial or harmful .
How to choose antioxidants for fighting the diseases .
Whenever you buy fruits and vegetables , keep in mind that you choose only those whose color is bright .
As much bright the color of the fruits and vegetables that much more would be the antioxidants .
Apart from this there are more antioxidants in fresh fruits in comparison to canned , cultured or heated food materials .
Generally if you consume food materials with little variation then you get more antioxidants .
Like in comparison to green colored or white colored grapes antioxidants are found more in red grapes .
In comparison to white onion red and yellow onions are more antioxidant rich .
Cauliflower , cabbage raw or light cooked broccoli is highly rich in antioxidants .
In green and grinded garlic much antioxidant is found .
In comparison to canned vegetables fresh and frozen vegetables are richer in antioxidants .
In place of boiled or steam cooked vegetables the vegetables cooked in microwave is richer in antioxidants .
Dark green leafy vegetables are highly rich in antioxidants .
In place of juice whole fruits are rich in antioxidants .
In place of canned juice fresh and cold juice is good source of antioxidant .
Dark orange colored carrot , gourd and sweet potato are substances rich in more antioxidants .
Being scared is also mental disease .
The person suffering from phobia knows that his fear is meaningless and not correct , but then also he is not able to keep control over it .
The disease of being scared has been found more in women .
Generally this problem arises between 20 to 30 years .
Many times this problem gets finished on its own .
In the situation of no treatment it keeps the person disturbed for long time .
having fear or being afraid is one of the many normal emotions .
Fear is in the mind of every person .
No matter how much brave the person is he does become afraid in dangerous situation .
The fear of going in social gatherings , meetings , groups of people and other such situations is called social phobia .
On facing social phobia the person becomes worried of this thing that whether other people do not consider him weak , stupid , bad etc .
The person suffering from social phobia always has the misconception that in such situations the people 's gaze would be on his behavior , dressing and minute actions .
Everybody would try to point out shortcomings in him .
The starting of the problem of social phobia comes up maximum in puberty .
The main symptoms of social phobia are avoiding going in other people 's , meetings , marriage , parties etc .
On the confrontation of such situations feeling restlessness , fast heart beat , panting and strange restlessness in the brain .
Reduction of the symptoms on their own on going away from these situations which disturb .
In social phobia not being able to converse by looking straight into the eyes of others .
Panicking while talking to others and feeling lack of confidence .
feeling uneasy in doing special tasks in front of others like - eating , writing etc .
The starting of shivering in voice and limbs while talking to others .
Not able to face the audience after going on the stage .
Due to all these reasons the limiting of the lifestyle of the person are the symptoms of social phobia .
Due to the disease of agoraphobia the person is scared of that situation where going out immediately is difficult .
For example - the fear of getting stuck in crowd , bus , train , lift etc .
In the disease of agoraphobia the person is extremely scared of such places and he stops going to these places .
If by chance also he faces such situations then he starts feeling very scared and helpless .
On the situations becoming serious the symptoms of rapid breathing , cold limbs , shivering , sweating , increase in heart beat , stomach pain , dryness of the mouth etc .
many times the person starts feeling such , as if his life will come out now .
If in such situation the patient is present with any of his dear ones then his fear gets reduced a bit .
Specific phobia is not considered so serious .
In specific phobia much difficulties do not arise in the daily life of the person .
the fear from any specific thing or situation is called specific phobia .
For example the fear more than usual arising out of cockroach , cat , lizard , river , bright light , noise , blood , skyscrapers etc . Come under this category .
The problem of fear in some people also arises due to genetic reasons .
In some people the genes of this disease comes from parents which gives rise to the problem of fear on getting negative environment .
The appearance of the problem of fear in the blood relatives of people suffering from this increases in comparison to general people .
In order to be free from the fears the mind keeps putting it in unconscious mind so that it can feel relaxed after forgetting the worries .
Without any effort the person put his worries in the unconscious mind and feels at peace .
But many times the mind fails to suppress his worries in mind and suffers from the problem of fear .
Those children who become scared more than usual when separated from there mother even for short while , become victim of phobia later on .
Good sleep keeps man fresh mentally and physically .
Apart from this in order to keep other activities of memory and brain function smoothly sufficient sleep is very essential .
People who take less sleep need sleep of 6 hours or less than this everyday .
Even on taking less sleep they do not face any type of problem and they stay absolutely alright mentally and physically .
According to psychologists people who take less sleep are ambitious , cordial and those working more .
People taking more sleep like to sleep every night for 9 hours or more than this .
Even due to sleeping for long there is no ill - effect on their daily activities .
people who sleep long are generally of a little depressed and tensed type .
Socially people who take more sleep are not so cordial .
Maximum people come in the category of persons sleeping for 7 . hours and in them properties of both types are found .
What happens when someone is not allowed to sleep continuously for many days .
Due to not sleeping the person may become victim of irritation and excitement .
Because of not sleeping his concentration power starts reducing .
On not sleeping continuously for 4 . days small bouts of sleep , delusion and the nature of not doing any work starts arising .
Because of not sleeping some people start hearing voices and they may also become the victim of madness .
People suffering from a special type of mental disease  which is also known by the name of bipolar mood disorder  have been seen to become victims of mania  mental rage  due to not taking enough sleep .
What is the problem of not getting sleep ?
The pain of not getting sleep can be understood by him who is suffering from this problem or has already suffered .
The problem of not getting sleep is known by the name of insomnia in medical term .
Almost every fourth person is the victim of insomnia .
The difficulty at the start of sleep - the main symptoms in this are trying hard to sleep , changing sides , to get up to sit , to out to walk , trying again to sleep , but becoming unsuccessful .
The person suffering from worry generally keep becoming the victim of this type of problem .
The sleep comes once but after that it keeps on getting disrupted and the person feels much discomfort .
This problem has been seen arising in the grave condition of depression or worry disease .
Some people do not face any special problem in getting sleep or to maintain it , but their sleep gets disrupted very early in the morning .
Due to this the person starts feeling restless and can not sleep again .
This problem has been seen arising in depression .
Some people only have the misconception of not getting sleep , while they keep taking good sleep .
Because of this they continue being tensed even in the absence of any special problem .
After taking full sleep , some people feel as if they have not got good sleep and due to this reason they do not feel fresh .
In people suffering from the problem of less sleep many types of problems may arise .
like feeling sleepy during day , reduction in the concentration power , headache , loss of appetite , tiredness , irritation etc .
Among other main problems connected to sleep are walking in the sleep , disruption of sleep after getting nightmares  night terror  , speaking in sleep , teeth chattering , bed - wetting etc .
Many times as the person lies down on bed for sleep , he feels a strange type of sensation in his legs .
During that an intense desire of shaking legs keeps arising in him due to which reason he is not able to sleep in proper way .
This problem is also known with the name of  Restless Leg Syndrome  .
The problem of sleeplessness may arise due to any mental or physical illness .
the chief among these are mania , depression , worry disease , schizophrenia , mental tension , heart disease , breathing problem , physical pain like backache , intoxicant consumption .
The other reasons of sleeplessness are related to idiopathic problems connected to sleep , none of whose reasons come to be known .
The problem of sleep in itself comes up as a type of disease .
many times different room or change in the place of sleep , shift duty etc also become the reason of sleeplessness .
But generally this problem does not stay for long time .
The disorder of getting more sleep arises in situations like intoxicant consumption , abnormal depression , thyroid disorder , narcolepsy , serious head injury , sleep anima  the obstruction of breathing in sleep  , infection in brain etc .
Doubt is one such psychological state through which every person crosses some time or the other .
The feeling of suspicion has two forms in which one is false suspicion and the other is true suspicion .
False suspicion in which the feeling of doubt subsides after counselling and making aware of the facts .
True suspicion in which after being made aware of the entire facts and truth he stays adamant unnecessarily on his suspicion .
True suspicion arises in serious mental disorders like psychosis , schizophrenia , mania etc .
Paranoid personality Disorder is one such disorder , in which the thought of the person becomes of doubting nature , but by conversation his doubts can be removed to great extent .
Schizophrenia is a serious mental disorder , in which strong doubts start arising in the mind of the person .
The doubts fail to be removed even after counselling or conversation .
In delusional disorder some special types of strong doubts arise in the mind of the person which on not being treated stay with the person for the entire life .
The life style , working etc of people with delusional disorder stay normal .
The problem of delusional disorder generally starts after the age of 30 years of age .
The feeling of doubt may also arise in people who do intoxication by consuming alcohol , cannabis , chars , marijuana , sleeping pills .
Some medicines used for the treatment of other diseases like steroids , amphetamines , thyroxin , isonaizide etc may also lead to the growth of the feelings of doubt as well .
Mental shock arising suddenly like - death of dear one , loss in business , being fired from job , theft , social disgrace etc leads to the growth of mental disorder named acute psychosis in some people .
In psychosis as well the mind of the person becomes of suspicious type .
In severe situations of other mental diseases like mania , depression , dementia etc also the person may become suspicious .
The nature of the person has also been seen becoming suspicious in physical diseases like AIDS , brain cancer , epileptic disease etc .
Continuously increasing mental tension or the burden of work many times given birth to mental fatigue  neurasthenia  .
Apart from irritation there are many symptoms of this disease .
The other symptoms of neurasthenia disease are feeling tired , energy less body and pain in muscles , headache , sleep disorder and dizziness .
Increase in heartbeat rate , restlessness , numbness of limbs , difficulty in getting sleep , getting bad thoughts in brain are the symptoms of depression .
On this disease becoming serious the person may become victim of irritation .
In the disease of mania  mental excitement  the person starts considering himself better than others and the power of his brain to work starts getting out of control .
the irritation arising due to the reason of mania disorder is the most serious and many times proves very dangerous .
Psychosis  schizophrenia  is a serious mental disease in which the person starts doubting unnecessarily on the people near to him .
The patient of psychosis feels as if somebody is plotting against him .
Because of this thought he becomes victim of irritation .
Some people 's personality only is with fault originally .
The nature of people with proud , asocial and emotionally vulnerable personality etc may be irritable .
Similarly in many other mental conditions and disorders like addiction to intoxicants , delusion and mania , massive changes in life , unfulfillment of desire , lack of sleep , disorder of lack of concentration , mental retardation etc also irritation may arise .
In some physical disorders also suspicious psychology has been seen to be growing .
In general term this disease schizophrenia is also called madness .
but psychiatrists do not consider the use of this word proper for this disease .
In India one person out of hundred in infected with this disease .
some people also consider this as the cancer of mental health .
But the medicines and methods being used in the treatment of this disease have opened new doors to get control on the disease .
The sooner this disease is detected the chances of successful treatment increases that very much .
Any person can become victim of the disease of schizophrenia .
Often this disease grows in the most important stage of life  between 15 to 45 years  .
In the disease of schizophrenia the person starts living in unreal and fictitious world leaving his real life .
In the start of the disease nobody gets to know because initially the symptoms of schizophrenia are very mild .
Like not feeling like working , irritation , little strangeness in the behavior , nagging about small things , occurrence of mild anxiety and sadness etc .
Gradually the symptoms of patient start becoming serious and he starts getting detached from the society .
After sometime the patient of schizophrenia starts paying less attention to hygiene even , like not taking bath for several days , not brushing , not changing clothes etc .
Behaving strangely like talking to oneself , laughing on own self , doing abnormal activity like putting garbage in pockets , cutting clothes by scissors without reason , wandering aimlessly , making gestures in air sitting alone , suddenly removing the clothes without reason , blabbering etc .
Appearance of delusion or doubt as if someone is plotting against patient , other people are doing his backbiting or else anyone has cast spell on him .
Even after umpteen counselling the patient of schizophrenia is adamant on his doubt .
It becomes very difficult to comprehend the speech of patient , because the mutual correlation of things said by him starts getting lost .
On asking one thing the patient of schizophrenia starts telling some other thing .
Giving unclear answer of questions may be one symptom of the disease of schizophrenia .
The patient starts hearing such voices which is audible only to him and not to others .
These are also called ... ... .. . Voices .
the patient of schizophrenia seems scared without reason .
The visibility of distorted shapes is also the symptom of schizophrenia .
The other symptoms of schizophrenia are to stay quiet , not feeling happy or sad at any matter or else staying happy without reason , getting angry without reason , fighting or breaking things , standing at a place for hours without caring for sun light or rain , dancing or singing without reason .
The patient feeling such as if the newspaper , TV and radio people are publishing news about him or else telling his thoughts to everyone .
Keep in mind that it is not essential that all these symptoms should be present in one patient .
In various patients the symptoms of this disease may be different .
Till now the actual reasons of the disease of schizophrenia has not been known accurately , but some understood reasons are this way .
Hereditary reason - if any of mother - father have the disease then it can go to the child through genes .
the chance of this disease in the blood relatives of the patient increases slightly in comparison to others .
Some chromosomes like 5 , 11 , 18 , 19 and X have been found to be related to this disease .
The chemical change in the brain - the error in dopamine , serotonin and other chemicals of the brain in some parts of the brain may become reason of this disease .
the medicine given for the treatment of this disease corrects this error thereby getting control over it .
Mental tension more than necessary may also give rise to the disease of schizophrenia .
On the increase of tension those people become the victims of the disease who already from before have the possibility of the occurrence of this within .
Often in India schizophrenia disease is considered to be the effect of magic , eternal rage or evil spirit .
Due to which reason the patient is first taken to the black magicians and absurd treatment is done .
Due to this reason right treatment is not received on time and the condition of the patient becomes serious .
Schizophrenia has also taken into its capture great personalities , artists and scientists .
After being inflicted by the disease of schizophrenia he had to leave his job .
But with the help of his wife and continuous treatment Nash became healthy enough and was successful in getting his job .
Mania is one such psychological disorder in which the person goes into the state of euphoria .
Mania disease is the inverse of depression .
In depression where the person becomes sad , lethargic and weak there in mania he starts staying excited more than usual .
Every person 's mood keeps changing with time .
Like at times he stays happy and at times sad .
The change of mood is a normal experience .
But when this mood starts staying happy or sad more than required and starts putting bad impact on the normal life of the person then it is the sign of psychological disorders like mania or depression .
Mania disease can occur both in men and women .
Children have also been seen becoming victim of mania .
Around one out of hundred people is inflicted with mania .
The main symptom of mania disease is staying excited and happy more than required .
Every time staying angry and in rage .
The onset of chain of thoughts in the brain .
The patient feeling such as if from all the four sides many ideas are unfolding and coming .
Speaking and laughing more than necessary .
Talking to strangers meaninglessly .
Talking big and considering oneself better and more powerful than the others .
Making big plans which are beyond the capacity of the person .
Suddenly more interest arising in social , political and religious affairs .
Ordering other people uselessly and on whose unfulfillment arguing and getting angry .
Lack of sleep , the patient feeling himself fresh even after sleeping one or two hours in the entire day .
Extravagance and useless shopping .
Becoming adamant more than required .
Not accepting and arguing after counselling by others .
Quarrelling and fighting over small things .
Growth of restlessness , not able to concentrate at one place .
Wearing fancy clothes , doing new fashion , considering oneself like hero or heroine .
Rejection from accepting that he has any psychological disease .
Increase in sexual desires .
In serious condition the patient starts ignoring his appearance , diet and body as well .
In some patients doubt and delusion also arise .
If the treatment of this condition is not done then this stage of mania may continue to stay generally for 4 to 5 months .
Once on the occurrence of the disease of mania there is always a risk of its occurrence in the future  especially , if proper treatment is not done  .
After the state of mania is corrected some patients continue to suffer with the feeling of self pity and crime .
Many times depression and mania start appearing in one patient only .
Once the patient suffers from mania and second time from depression .
This type of mental disorder is also known by the name of swing  maniac depressive disorder  or bipolar disorder .
In India the patient suffering with mania continues to suffer from this disease for long time .
On not getting the right treatment many types of problems like heavy loss in business , disharmony in mutual relations , legal problems , argument with fellow workers and officers , family problems etc . surround such people badly .
Can the attack of mania come again ?
Yes of course , the attack of mania can come again in the life of the person suffering from mania .
In the situation of no treatment many attacks can come second time in the life of the person suffering with mania .
The attacks occurring in the future may also be of depression .
After how long second attacks would come or else how serious they would be it is slightly difficult to say all these for certain .
But it has been seen that , as the age increases the attacks also start occurring frequently and their seriousness also go on increasing .
Through proper treatment the occurrence of the attack of mania can be stopped .
Some conditions related to the disease of mania are mix type , rapid cycler , ultra rapid cycler .
In the person suffering with mix type disorder the symptoms of depression and mania are present simultaneously .
For example on one hand the person is working with great pace and enthusiasm , but inside his view towards life would be negative .
In rapid cycler disorder the person starts becoming the victim of mania or depression at least four times within a year .
In the ultra rapid cycler disorder the symptoms of depression and mania keep changing fast among themselves at the interval of some hours or days .
The ultra rapid cycler patient starts feeling sad after staying unusually in happiness for some hours .
This sadness of ultra rapid cycler patient starts changing fast again after some time .
This is thing of surprise that the mood of person also can be the victim of disease .
The patient suffering with ultra rapid cycler at times starts becoming sad in the form of depression and at times uncontrollably happy in the state of mania .
The loss of mental capacity occurring in the old age  more than 60 years  due to which excessive reduction starts coming in the memory , intelligence , prudence , the capacity to learn new and the capability to adjust according to new situations of the person .
All these symptoms are the signal of the disorder of dementia  psychological delusion  .
Although with increase in age reduction starts coming in the mental and physical capacity of every person .
This reduction does not produce any major difficulty in the normal life of the person .
For example if 65 year old person at times forgets the name of any relative or an object after keeping it somewhere , then it is not essential that this problem is the signal of disease .
On putting some pressure he even remembers those situations again .
But the patient of the dieses of dementia starts forgetting more than required and losses the ability to remember again .
In dementia the person is forced to behave like children .
The child though with age develops his mental capabilities , but the condition of the patient suffering with the disease of dementia becomes serious with increase in age .
there are two reasons for the dementia disease .
The first reason is the contraction of brain .
This happens due to the disease named Alzheimer .
In Alzheimer due to the death of the cells of brain the size of the brain starts decreasing .
Together with this the chemical named acetilcolinesterase also starts decreasing in brain .
The second reason is the accumulation of the clots in the transmitters of blood providing nutrition to brain .
In India among all the reasons of dementia this is a major reason .
The symptoms of the disease do dementia are as follows .
Lack of memory , difficulty in remembering new things .
Arising of problems in remembering date , telephone number and the account of money .
Gradually forgetting old things .
In dementia produced due to the disease named Alzheimer the loss of memory takes place very slowly about which many times for up to several years there is no knowledge .
Loss in the awareness of place and time for example considering morning as evening , to start using kitchen as bathroom , forgetting the way to home etc .
Forgetting the names of things found nearby like on showing the spectacles not able to say what it is .
Purchasing unnecessary things from market .
Changes in personality like staying silent more than required or else the growth of very irritable or doubting nature .
Such symptoms are seen in 30 percent patients of dementia .
Repeating one thing repeatedly , talking nonsense , cracking joke untimely , putting on clothes weirdly , keeping things here and there .
Reduction in the ability to do fundamental things like bathing , wearing clothes , eating etc .
Losing control on oneself suddenly .
Becoming restless , shouting and fighting in anger .
Shitting in clothes or even in open .
Such often occurs in the last stages of dementia disease .
Difficulty in speaking , dizziness , loss of weight , difficulty in sleep etc symptoms also may arise in dementia disease .
All these symptoms should be present in a patient together such is not essential .
Every patient of dementia may have his own different symptoms .
If this disease is due to the reason of the disease named Alzheimer then the death of patient occurs between 1 to 20 years .
On the occurrence of this disease before 50 years its more serious form comes forward .
The ex president of America Ronald Reagan had also become the Vitim of this disease only .
In the film Black Amitabh Bachchan has been shown to be suffering from this disease only .
God knows how many women and girls due to not being able to express straight the complexes of the mind , suppressed desires , problems and difficulties exhibit in the form of hysteria .
Even after tiring to know intensely , many times it becomes difficult to know the matters on their mind and this problem goes on continuing for long time .
In one way the problem of hysteria is the voice of the mind .
Generally the meaning of hysteria is considered in the form of the onset of bots of unconsciousness .
But there are many types of hysteria .
Due to ignorance this myth is popular pervasively that this disease occurs due to the effect of various supernatural powers , ghost , spirits , souls of dead etc .
Actually hysteria disease occurs due to the reason of the problems happening at the mental level .
In India hysteria disease is found more in married women .
the disease of hysteria is found in children from 5 years to even men .
The chance of the occurrence of the disease of hysteria is the maximum between the age of 10 up to 30 years .
In psychiatry hysteria is known by the name of dissociative disorder .
The symptoms of the disease of hysteria are as follows .
Occurrence of seizures - in this various types of symptoms can occur together or separately .
Like breathing rapidly or with difficulty , throwing limbs here and there in air , staying unconscious for many hours , tightening of fist , the pupils continuing to move after the closing of eyes etc .
The seizures of hysteria are different from the seizures of epilepsy .
Theatrical hysteria - in this the patient conducts as if in him there is the residing of any god , spirit or ghost and the powers of giving boon or punishment have come in him .
That time the voice of the patient also changes .
Big crowd of audience get surrounded near him and people ask for favors from him .
Paralysis - in this the condition of weakness appears in one or more organs like in hand , foot , shoulders etc .
Whose relation is not with any physical deformity or disease even .
At times there is such feeling as if the body organ has stopped working .
Many times for doctor also differentiating between actual paralysis and hysterical paralysis becomes difficult .
Dumbness and noiselessness - in these conditions the patient is not able to speak anything .
But without any problem he can whisper , can do his talking by writing or gesturing through hands .
On investigation all the organs of the patient of hysteria like the tongue , lips , sound cord etc are found to be working in normal way .
Why does hysteria arise ?
The mind complicated by some problem when fails to find any solution then the situation of a mental conflict arises .
In such situation if any person is not able to face his mental strife or is not able to express his problem in any way then the suffering mind finds the way to escape from his problems or to express them through hysteria .
Often women due to social and domestic situations are not able to express their desires and feelings and consequently many types of internal conflict arise in their mind .
These conflicts continuing in the sub - conscious mind become the reason of hysteria .
Hysteria is completely the game of sub - conscious mind .
The addiction of intoxication is also the disease of mind .
The biggest problem is this that those people who do intoxication they themselves do not know whether they are the victim of addiction or not .
One person who takes eight - ten pegs of alcohol only four or five times in a month he assumes that the addiction of alcohol has occurred to him .
On the other hand that person who takes half bottle of alcohol every night and can not sleep without drinking , says to himself that no - no I am not drunkard , drunkards are of different kind altogether .
I drink only some , that also while sleeping .
The person does the intoxication of anything and to him any of the three things out of six things given underneath apply to him then assume that he has been addicted or used to for intoxication .
Intense desire to take intoxicating substance .
Repeatedly failing in the attempts to quit intoxication .
Arising of physical and mental problems on the unavailability of intoxication  like the shivering of limbs on not getting alcohol , not getting sleep or getting restless  .
Gradual increase in the quantity of intoxication  because after some time the effect of the previous quantity starts reducing  .
For example the person doing smack intoxication in some months from half gram smack his coming to two gram smack .
Wasting a lot of time in the consumption of intoxicating substances .
The person ignoring the other aspects of his life like socializing , doing his work , care of the children etc .
Intoxication is harming the body , despite knowing this continuing intoxication .
For example despite jaundice and vomiting blood not stopping the consumption of alcohol .
Apart from this other symptoms like intoxication in solitude , harm to the physical and mental health , taking intoxication in large quantity in one go etc are also the signals of the problem of intoxication .
Beer , whisky , champagne , vodka , rum , gin , brandy , alcohol , country made alcohol etc come in the category of alcohol .
In the category of tobacco bidi , cigarette , cigar , tobacco powder etc .
Canabis - charas , marijuana , sulpha , hashish all these substances are obtained from the plant of canabis  hemp  .
Sleeping pills like - diazepam , nitrozapam , alprazola  alprex  etc .
Opium related substance - opium , smack , brown sugar , capsules proxivon and spasmovon , the pills of lomotil etc .
Other substances - amphitamin . . . . Solvent  petrol , eraser fluid , polish etc  cocaine , tea , coffee etc .
Tea , coffee are also in fact intoxicating substances , but due to not being much harmful they have been accepted on the social basis .
Being mentally or physically dependent on substances affecting the activities of body and brain is only called the addiction of intoxication .
The addiction of intoxication has been considered a mental disorder .
The Indians alone drink approximately 120 crore litre of alcohol during a year .
The consumption of alcohol in India is continuously gaining strength .
If the drunkard is able to quit alcohol foursome months then it is good riddance , because during this his body and liver gain strength as earlier .
But if the liver has become absolutely bad then even after quitting alcohol it does not become alright .
For the patient it is very difficult to quit alcohol on his own is very difficult .
for this a lot of will power is needed which is formed in very few people .
Some people think that by gradually reducing the quantity of alcohol one day I will completely quit it in fact such people deceive themselves .
Like this it is nearly impossible to quit the addiction of alcohol .
In order to get rid of this problem it is extremely important to take the advice of the psychiatrist .
People in whom there is no internal desire to quit alcohol , their family members should certainly meet their closest psychiatrist once .
many times the work appearing difficult is in fact easy .
Through some methods in such addicted people producing the internal desire to quit drinking may be tried .
To treat addiction two method are used one is through medicines and second through behavioural treatment .
In the treatment through medicines some special medicines are started after completely stopping the alcohol of the patient .
After some days of this the patient and his family members are told about two different types of medicines .
One medicine helps in reducing the addiction of alcohol while the second medicine produces negative effect as the alcohol is consumed .
Due to this medicine reddening of the face , vomiting , breathlessness , restlessness , giddiness , fainting etc occur .
Due to the fear of these negative effects the person stops consuming alcohol .
In the behavioural treatment talking with patient , counselling , relaxation , exercise , desensitization , aversion therapy , group therapy etc are included .
Along with medicines behavioural treatment also has very important contribution in treatment .
No matter what the addiction is , after getting the treatment 60 - 70 percent people again start the intoxication within few months .
In such situation the patient and his family members should meet with his doctor again without feeling sad .
Today the main aim for the treatment of intoxication of the psychiatrists world over is to keep the person addiction free for long time after successful treatment .
If the person drinking alcohol more than required is not ready to stop alcohol completely or else is unsuccessful in doing this , then the consumption of alcohol in controlled way may be one way of treatment .
This method is determined after talking to the doctor .
Abstain from the quacks advertising the medicines for quitting alcohol without telling .
Never ever make the patient consume any such medicine , because due to these medicines if the patient consumes alcohol then due to negative effect  reaction  the patient may even die due to this .
Keep in mind that addiction also is the disease of mind only .
Other diseases like running nose , cold , cough may occur again similarly the addiction to intoxication may also occur again .
Therefore do not panic , take stem for repeated treatment .
Apart from the addiction of intoxication the addicted person may also become the victim of other mental problems like worry , depression , fear , suicide etc .
After leaving any intoxication its desire  the intense desire to do intoxication  troubles the person for some days .
This way after gaining control the desire to do intoxication dies gradually .
After the treatment the doubt of the family members on the behavior and conduct of the patient becomes the cause of complex for the patient .
Due to this in anger he can start the intoxication again .
Therefore the family members not making the environment of apprehension , should increase mutual co - ordination and trust with the patient , so that on doing intoxication again he himself tells about it .
The consumption of these pills is not any serious subject till the time its consumption is done according to the advice of the doctor .
The intoxication of tobacco is also like e mental disease just like other intoxications whose treatment is possible .
Among the cancer occurring to Indians 40 percent cancer is due to the reason of tobacco .
Every year due to the reason of smoking 8,00,000 people die .
At the time of quitting intoxication the desire produced for intoxication troubles maximum to the person at the time of quitting intoxication .
Once after the production of the desire of intoxication it stays for nearly 3 to 5 minutes .
To gain control over these desire of intoxication is little difficult , but not impossible .
After quitting the intoxication of tobacco it is natural process for the increase of 2 . kilograms in the weight of the person .
On the increase of weight there is no need for any panic .
In the entire world nearly 400 million  40 crore  people are suffering with mental problems .
Not just this , among 10 chief diseases of the world making man incapable 5 are of psychological type .
Seeing these facts the W . .  World Health Organisation  started introducing huge missions against these diseases in 2001 .
In India every year nearly one lac ten thousand people are becoming victims of suicide .
The deaths occurring due to the reason of suicide is one of the ten main causes of deaths in entire India .
Every year in the entire world nearly 10 lac people end their life by their own hands .
In India every minute one failed attempt of suicide and every fifth minute one painful incident of suicide occurs .
In the cases of suicide India is at second position after China in the whole world .
Today the advertisement of reiki , naturopathy , touch therapy etc is being done with great vigor .
Any person who does not know even this as to how does the human brain work , starts treating with the help of these techniques that he has the successful treatment of worry , depression and mental tension etc .
Abstain from such ignorant doctors , these methods may not necessarily be wrong , in the treatment of psychological disorders these techniques have chiefly proved to be unsuccessful .
In the initial stages of the disease of depression there is condition of mild mental tension and these methods show slight influence , then also it is considered to be the certified method of the correct treatment of mental diseases .
In the disease of muscular rheumatism the symproms of pain in muscles etc symptoms are found .
The other symptoms of muscular rheumatism disease are back ache , chest pain , pain in neck and stiffness of neck .
Muscular rheumatism disease is produced due to the reason of doing physical labor , injury or getting cold .
At times the accumulation of toxins in rectum or intestines , becomes reason of this .
In muscular rheumatism pain regularly stays in muscles .
This pain increases when the organ in which the patient has pain , brings that in use .
If the suffering muscles are pressed then pain becomes more .
On the suffering organ one should foment with pultis or hot boric lotion .
Massaging with pain relieving oils , electrocution and rest should be given to suffering organ .
At times there is relief by putting beladona plaster or anti flojistine on the suffering organ .
On the afflicted organ daily massage medi cream  T . . .  two - three times daily .
In medicines there is benefit by giving aspirin , codapyrin , predesin , delta - corlin , canalgesic , soda salycillas , potash iodide , phinastine , ashtiryni , egopyrine , unalgine , butarine , tolserum , butajolydine , delta buta jolydine , lithius carb ar sallicilate .
In injection igapyrine , soda salycillis , unelgin or novalgin are specially useful .
If the injection of 5 c . . of normal saline is injected beneath the skin of the afflicted part then it is beneficial .
Some patients get good relief with the injection of path dine hydrochloride .
The injection of Simpleton work as magic in some patients .
Muscular atrophy disease is the drying up of or thinning of the muscles .
Generally two types of deficiency come in muscles either their efficiency become less or with this their number decrease .
Muscular atrophy occurs due to many diseases , like making any organ of the body work unusually after prolonged or new diseases , after long fast .
In case of stroke in any part of muscular atrophy the diseases like arthritis , nervous system diseases and the diseaseases of vessels etc occur .
In the treatment of muscular atrophy medicines have not proved to be specially satisfactory .
Massage , electrocution , special type of exercise and special attention to improve health all these ways are helpful in pacifying the disease of muscular atrophy .
In muscular atrophy disease Vitamin . complex , bicadex , male vigor theragram capsule etc energy rich medicines also are beneficial .
Myasthenia Gravis occurs in women more in comparison to men .
Myasthenia Gravis occurs more in the age of twenty years to thirty years .
In the disease of Myasthenia Gravis the muscles fail to do there work correctly .
Though in the disease of Myasthenia Gravis the nerves and nerve - centres stay absolutely correct .
In Myasthenia Gravis disease whatever problem comes , it occurs in muscles alone .
On doing slight labor tiredness comes which goes after taking rest .
In Myasthenia Gravis disease the fatigue becomes so high that the breathing stops and even the death of the patient occurs .
Although Myasthenia Gravis disease occurs even in any part of the body , but it occurs mainly in the neck , head , eyes and muscles .
The result of the disease of Myasthenia Gravis disease is this that the lids on the upper part of the eye get hung .
In Myasthenia Gravis disease the mouth becomes twisted , due to which while eating proper chewing does not occur .
In this disease difference comes in voice , due to which pronunciation does not become clear .
If the effect of Myasthenia Gravis disease is seen on the other muscles of the body then the patient faces trouble in movement .
As such the patient can neither sit properly nor can he even take breath properly .
Myasthenia Gravis disease is generally very serious , in this death generally occurs only due to the obstruction of respiratory process .
Myasthenia Gravis disease stays for at least six months and for 10 to 15 years .
Half grain of Ikedrin twice or thrice a day and prostegmine have proved useful in depression disease .
This may be given both in the form of pills or injection .
If you have little - bit of common sense , and little - bit of perseverance then you do not know how much happy you can make yourself on this planet .
Through these words of Saumerset Maughm it becomes clear as to how important is the place of laughter in life .
Actually the person who does not have any place of amusement in his life he does not have to make any effort for becoming sad .
Without making any effort he can stay sad uninterrupted daily .
The smile of a second or one good laugh is capable of changing the direction of life .
According to Bacon the jovial nature of person is the best means of longevity .
Tagore says whenever I laugh then the burden of my mind is lightened .
The secret of the popularity of Gandhiji was his love for fun .
Gandhiji writes laugh unties the knots of mind very easily .
Not of my mind alone but of your mind a well .
Laugh is one simple - natural process , but it is an amazing process .
This is one basic nature which is found only in humans .
It is said that person devoid of literature , music and art is like animal .
This thing is right to some extent but if seen on behavioural level then the person who does not use this gift of laughter endowed to man by nature then he is the biggest animal .
Human body is like a laboratory in which every moment biochemical and electromagnetic changes continue taking place .
As a result of these various changes man gets the feeling of happiness and pain .
Mind has deciding role in this .
According to our psychological state the bio - chemical structure of our body is only affected .
Optimistic psychological state has positive and negative psychological state has negative impact on the bio - chemical structure of our body .
Laughing is one such process which puts only positive effect on human body because in the process of laughing the role of mind becomes null or negligible .
The person laughing reaches to the state of no state that5 very moment which is the state of meditation only .
When you laugh then in those moments you reach to the state of deep thought or meditation on your own because at one time only laughing and meditation becomes impossible .
The meaning of laughter is to produce obstruction in thought process .
If you really laugh in reality then the thought process whether it is positive or negative stops immediately because at one time you do only one thing holistically .
Because of our incomplete activities our life becomes haphazard and imbalanced .
Therefore whatever action you do that in complete attention .
In laughter especially in the state of laughing heartily one is able to control the restlessness of the mind no matter if it is momentary .
That momentary control over the restlessness of the mind is an incredible incident .
For man it is beneficial situation for his good health .
Laughter is in fact a condition of instant yoga .
The more the recurrence of these moments that much we will go near the yoga rich life .
By laughing the benefit of exercise is also obtained .
By laughing forcefully the breathing process is also affected .
Therefore the practice of both yogasana and pranayam occurs in the action of laughter .
Due to laughing because of the consumption of extra calories one gets help in controlling the weight .
Due to laughing because of the increase in blood circulation freshness appears in the body especially the muscles of the face .
Yoga is a complete treatment methodology .
Laughter is also not less than any type of yoga therefore through laughter the medical treatment is related to laughter .
After yoga practice and other physical activities and aerobics and athletics etc the practice of laughter is also done .
After sports and mental labor the tiredness of body relieved with laughter and one more freshness comes in the body .
Not only in sports but in the matter of personality development and during motivational workshops as well the inclusion of laughter is must because after a good laugh the attention of the person becomes more concentrated and becomes centred on the subject again .
In everything literature , culture and art laughter is certainly present in some or the other form otherwise reader or subscriber would not be able to establish harmony .
Laughter is a complete exercise in which all the nerves of the body open and the body becomes fresh after the tiredness of the body is removed .
By laughing openly good exercise of lungs , throat and mouth occurs .
The nerves of stomach and chest become strong .
The diaphragm becomes strong and by this one gets help in the treatment of the diseases related to mouth , throat and lungs .
By laughter the rate of blood flow becomes fast because of which the quantity of oxygen in the blood increases .
In this entire process glow comes on the face .
The more one laughs and makes the other laugh that much more his face would glow .
The more the absorption of oxygen in the body that much more energy would be produced and as much energy is produced that much we will stay disease free .
This way laughter is the healing and nutritive element of life and it may also be called the essence of life .
Through laughter changes come in the bio - chemical construction of our body .
Due to laughter reduction comes in the level of hormones producing tension namely cortisone and epinephrine because of which the body becomes tension free and the meaning of tension free is health .
Apart from this due to laughter the quantity of hormone named endorphin increase which is a natural painkiller and works as disease immunity for the body .
According to the research of Dr . Lee Berk of Rosalinda University of California T . Lymphocytes stay more active because of laughing and staying happy because of which there is increase in the growth of those natural cells which are called killer cells .
These killer cells are capable of destroying those dangerous cells capable of the growth of cancer .
This way by laughing one gets help in getting rid of dangerous diseases .
When you are surrounded by depression then laughter only is one such medicine which can stop your depression .
Due to laughing all the pain , all tensions melt away .
Due to laughing the body gets relief after becoming tired .
Due to laughing good sleep comes .
A cheerful person never suffers from depression and not even does the activity of suicide .
Objectively the treatment of all the depressing diseases is hidden in laughter .
Objectively laughter is the only one such medicine which is capable of stopping wrinkles externally and is helpful in making you full of motivation internally .
With laughter exercise you can say good bye to old age forever .
Laughter is a spiritual health , laughter is burden less .
When you laugh then you can keep your mind separate .
The person who can not laugh for him the door of intellect is closed .
For me the importance of laughter is high .
Any religion has not thought of laughter ever .
Religion has always emphasized on seriousness and therefore all the world went on becoming sick psychologically .
Seriousness is a mental state produced from negative pont of view while laughter is a state obtained from positive point of view .
Through laughter throw away the coat of negative point of view or seriousness forever .
Leave making excuses and smile a little .
After this laugh and laugh strongly .
This only is the invaluable essence of life and the art of living the life with enthusiasm .
In homeopathy the treatment of esitinse disease has proved to be fruitful .
In last stage of patient suffering with liver disease esitinse disease has been seen .
In esitinse disease water accumulates in the stomach .
This esitinse is seen in the disease of kidney , the disease of peritoneum , heart disease , sound system , self stopping fever , cancer , the diseases of blood vessels .
esitinse is not disease on its own , but this disease is seen in the guise of other diseases .
In esitinse disease due to the accumulation of water in the stomach the front portion of the stomach appears to be big and high , the amount of urine decreases and often constipation persists .
In esitinse disease there is difficulty in respiration .
In this disease the heart beats strongly and sometimes one feels thirsty and sometimes not .
In homeopathy in the disease of esitinse the following medicines can be administered and observed .
You can see by giving Epismel - 30 if the urine is very less , there is no thirst , there is intense pain in the muscles of the stomach , inflammation and pain in the body at various places like stings , difficulty in respiration on lying down , relief in sitting down .
The aposinum medicine is fruitful in all types of swellings .
Due to eposynum disease there is intense excitement in gall bladder .
Aposynum medicine is given to the patient on the occurrence of the following symptoms vomiting immediately after drinking water , urinating like mud , dysentery .
Apart from this among other homeopathic medicines chayna , colchicam , canbalbulus ars , lycopodium , natrumsulph etc medicines are those which you can take under the guidance of the nearest able doctor .
Why do we yawn ?
According to Dr . . Balasubramaniam there are many things in the daily life which are considered common but we do not have any explanation of these with us .
Yawning is one such thing .
If I see you yawning then why do I also start yawning ?
Why is yawning like an infection ?
Why do we start yawning a little time before going top bed and immediately after getting up ?
Together with yawning why do we stretch ?
Someone had said that yawning is like economics regarding which everyone has his one favorite explanation .
A very popular belief is this that we yawn then when we need more oxygen .
But it has been found that this belief about yawning is not correct .
Dr . Robert Provin of Maryland University is doing research on yawnings for long time .
Dr . Robert Provin made some people sit in the room and kept on changing the composition of air .
At first he made the volume of carbon dioxide 3 . percent in the room and observed the rate of yawning in people .
After this he made the volume of carbon dioxide zero percent and once more the rate of yawnings were seen .
It has been seen that both the times the rate of yawnings  dimension  has been nearly equal .
Do we take more yawnings when we are tired ?
No difference has been seen in the dimension of yawnings before the exercise , during and afterwards .
Does yawning have any relation with age ?
It has been found that new born baby and even the foetus yawn .
During ultrasound inspection yawnings have been recorded in twenty weeks pregnancy .
It seems that this action is approximately as important as respiration , movement of eyes and parturition during birth .
This is an involuntary action on which the person does not have any control .
Yawning is not a simple action .
On average yawning is of 6 to 7 seconds .
During yawning the air is inhaled till deep and then released all of a sudden .
During yawning the heartbeat rate increases up to 30 percent and many types of nervous scientific changes occur in the brain .
It seems that the relation of yawning is to the attentiveness of waking up .
By this one understands as to why long spells of yawning comes to people suffering from nervous scientific problems  epilepsy , multiple sclerosis  .
It can be that yawning also does the work of a psychological pressure - release .
It is clear that yawning is not just the symbolism of boredom , sadness and the lack of oxygen alone .
On the basis of the nature of the disease , the availability of the related medicine and its process of effect the doctor prescribes the patient to take pills , injection and syrup according to the need .
Maximum medicines are available in all the three forms of pills , syrup  solution  , injection .
Then also there are many such allopathic medicines which are available in one form only .
Keeping the condition of the patient , age , condition of the disease and the effect of the medicine in sight the medicine is made to reach the body through the following media .
Through the mouth the medicine is given in the form of tablet  pill  , capsule , syrup  solution  .
The cover of capsule is made of gelatine which melts after going to the gall bladder .
With the name of medicines which are to be drunk you often read linctuses , mixture , emulsion .
From linctus the meaning is of that medicine which generally is in sweet solution .
Mixture is the solution of many medicines in water or in other chemicals .
In emulsion there are two solvents which generally becomes negligible .
The medicine of heart disease is placed on the tongue , which shows effect immediately by melting gradually .
This medium of taking the medicine is called ' sub lingual ' medium .
Injection and allopathic treatment have become the synonym of each other .
For giving glucose and other medicine fast into the body injection is given intravenous that is through the medium of arteries .
The veins visible on the outer part of the body take the deoxygenated blood towards the heart .
Opposite to this the arteries situated in the deeper parts of the body take the blood to the rest of the body from the heart .
In the arteries this blood flows with the speed of 65 kilometre per hour .
Then only the arteries are heard to be beating fast .
In general terms it only is called ' pulse ' .
the second popular medium of giving injection is ' intramuscular ' that is giving injection in the muscles .
Generally injection is put on the upper or outer part of the arm or the upper part of the hips only .
Actually in both these places the nerves beneath the flesh is less .
If any nerve gets damaged through the needle of the injection then it can be lethal for the patient .
Apart from these popular methods there are ' subcutaneous ' and ' intradermal ' methods as well .
In these methods instead of putting the injection deeply in the flesh it is put at low depth beneath the skin .
The ' turbutaline ' injection in respiratory disease and ' insulin ' injection of diabetes is put through this method only .
In the subcutaneous method the effect of the medicine is slow .
Apart from this injection is also put in stomach  peritoneal  . In chect  pectoral  and spinal cord  spinal  .
In the diseases like asthma and cough the patient takes in some medicine by inhaling through breathing .
The medicine to make unconscious during surgery  ether  is also given through this medium alone .
In the medium of local application ointment , balm , oil etc are applied in body pain , warts , injury , itching atc on the essential places .
The ointment applied on the nose , ear and eyes and glycerine etc applied on mouth ulcers also come under this category alone .
How does the medicine show its effect ?
The medicines given through the injection enter the blood flow directly only .
Therefore the effect also is quick and pervasive .
The medicines taken through mouth digest with the food in gall bladder and intestines .
The intestines fail to absorb these medicines completely .
If they stomach is empty then the oral medicines show more effect .
The medicine absorbed through the intestines goes to the liver through the ' postal vessel ' .
If the functioning of the liver is not alright then maximum medicines become inactive .
various types of enzymes affect the chemical activities of the medicines .
From the liver the medicine goes to the heart and from there through the pumping action it sends the blood to every cell of the body .
The medicine travels in the entire body through the plasma available in the blood .
These medicines finally mix with the fluid available outside the cell and show their effect wherever there is need of medicines .
After the consumption the remaining medicine is excreted through the urine after reaching the kidney from the heart through the medium of the excretory parts of the cells .
Therefore during the excretion of some medicines the color of the urine appears to be yellow , red or dark .
Which medicine stays in the body for how long and for how long it affects , on this basis alone the doctor prescribes the mode of taking the medicine to the patient .
Even after scholarly studies and researches the exact theory of the effect of the medicine has not been developed .
Receptor Theory ' proceeds by considering this that along with special tissues there is a construction named receptor in the body which attaches to and then speeds up as the medicine comes close to the tissue .
The second theory is of ' antimetaolitis ' , according to which the cells acquire their nutrition from special type of elements .
The antibacterial medicines too possess the shape of nutritive elements .
As such the microbes etc consider these as nutrition and their growth stops .
Finally the microbes die and the patient become alright .
Enzymes are those elements , which are helpful in fastening the various chemical activities in the body .
Some enzymes do the work of ferrying the liquid inside and outside of the cells .
Some medicines are capable of affecting the general nature of these enzymes and the functioning cells .
Allopathic medicines are made of various types of plants , minerals , chemicals and the body of animals .
These medicines show effect according to the nature of the specific disease .
Some medicines fulfil the deficiency of special elements in the body while some deactivate the chemicals which have increased .
Similarly some medicines provide speed to the activities of the body while some finish off the growing microbes .
Due to this reason alone the side effects  ill effects  of English medicine is also very much .
Not sleep , the base of the entire health is yoganidra .
As it is clear from the name alone , the attainment of the condition of sleep through yoga only is yoganidra .
What is yoga ?
The control over the activities of will or mind alone is yoga .
Handicappedness is an extremely ancient and omnipresenet problem .
The people of all the parts , religions and communities of the world get affected with handicappedness more or less .
Everyone male - female , rich - poor can be the victim of handicappedness .
With time change has come in the appearance of this problem of handicappedness .
Today control has been achieved to very great extent on measles , reasons of blindness at birth , leprosy , polio etc .
The cases of cerebral palsy and mental retardation are increasing .
The spread of education in handicaps is also increasing and the understanding of people towards handicappedness is also becoming positive .
Technical development has provided artificial reading power to blind people , better hearing power to deaf people , improved movement to skeletally handicapped people .
The development of medical science has prevented the growth of diseases and put reins on the process of conversion of diseases on handicappedness .
The spreading of education among handicapped people is increasing due to the efforts of Indian government , state governments and self help organizations .
Today the situation has come to this that by providing suitable environment and extra facilities the handicapped people can be included in the mainstream of society .
By providing obstruction free environment we can provide them with opportunity to become respected citizens .
Now instead of becoming burden on the society the handicapped people may come in the condition of contributing to the society .
Computer , information technology , automation have made working for handicapped people very simple .
Now in comparison to normal people handicapped people may contribute better .
The weakening of any part of body , situation arising due to deformation is called handicappedness .
Before understanding handicappedness well it is essential to understand the various organs and their working .
The ability of sight plays important role in our life .
Most of our activities are possible because of our reason of seeing .
The various types of deformities occuring in eyes become the reason of vision imparement .
How much is the vision impairement this a specialist doctor can tell only after complete check up but there is also an easy method of testing it .
If a person is not able to count the fingers of a person standing at the distance of three metres then he can be considered visually impaired .
The complete investigation of visually impaired person is essential .
A big part of the eye ball is white .
This white part maintains the shape of the eye and also protects its fragile construction .
A small part exists in front of the eye which is called cornea and it works as a window .
Light enters through the medium of cornea .
Hearing impairment is that condition in which child or adult is incapable of hearing partially or in complete form .
There are many types of hearing impairment .
Many times outer and middle ear fail to transmit sound to the inner ear .
In such situation the person faces difficulty in hearing .
One more reason for this can be this that dirt gets accumulated in the canal of the ear .
Apart from this deformity in the construction of the bones of the ear , injury or because of the reason of any disease also it can happen .
The reason of other type of deafness can be the deformity in the inner ear .
The more the deformity , more is the loss of hearing ability .
In the innere ear place is decided for every frequency .
In the inner ear the loss at any frequency becomes less and on some it becomes extremely high .
There are many reasons of this type of deformity but generally due to the reason of damage of the minute construction of cochlea this deformity takes birth .
In some children due to the damage occuring in cochlea the ability to bear loud noise gets destroyed .
The more the damage becomes the ability of child to recognize words become that much less .
When the damage occurred in the cochlea it does not get corrected through treatment and surgery then there is no other way leaft apart from wearing the hearing aid .
If the pregnant woman suffers from from viral fever , influenza , chicken pox , mumps etc in the first trimester then the child in the womb can be adversely affected .
The child in the womb can also become deaf .
In childhood diseases like meningitis , jaundice , typhoid , measles can put adverse effect on the hearing ability of the person .
The complications during birth like foreceps delivery can have influence on the ear .
Continuous flow of water and pus may also become the reason of becoming deaf .
If the pregnant woman eats unnecessary medicine without the consult of the doctor for abortion or any disease then there could be adverse effect on the foetus and it may also become deaf .
There are two ways of safety from deafness .
First way is this that one should stay away from those diseases which give birth to deafness .
Second this that if there has been the influence of this disease then it should be prevented from being converted to handicappedness .
The useful instrument used for hearing in deaf people is basically a small electronic appliance .
This electronic appliance is also called a minute mike .
Through this electronic appliance or minute mike the sound can be amplified many times .
Speaking is actually a special process which differentiates us from other organisms .
If by 15 months the child is not able to speak meaningful word then it is essential to get him tested .
If by this age the child starts speaking words like mummie , papa then there is no reason to worry .
If the voice of the child is abnormal , heavier , or comes with obstruction then also it is essential to get it c hecked up .
During management program the exercises for the growth of child is being done .
During management plan the activities of daily life are taught .
The child is taught to speak , move etc under the management plan .
Under this the difficulties of the children are solved and the treatment of the diseases are also done .
Some activities among these take place in hospital or rehabilitation center and some take place at home alone .
The activities which take place at home are demonstrated to the mother - father and important instructions are given to be repeated at home .
According to the American Association of Mental Retardation that person is called mentally retarded who is not able to do his simple activity .
The measurement of intelligence is less than 70 and bothe these problems start affecting the person from the age of 18 years only .
From 0 . years the child learns to stand up , walk , run , eat , wear clothes , use toilet , keep clean , to converse etc .
From 6 years to 12 years of age the child learns to read - write , talk meaningfully , to help etc .
From 12 to 18 years of agethe child learns to do all his domestic work and lears to use hospital , post - office , public vehicle , phone etc .
The child acquires skill in sports and entertaining activities as well .
the child learns to do useful work as well .
That child whose growth rate is less than the above mentioned rate he is considered to be mentally retarded .
Intelligence measurement scale is a method to measure intelligence prepared by the scientists .
The average IQ of man is from 90 to 110 .
If the IQ is between 70 to 89 then the man can lead satisfactory life .
If the IQ is less than 70 then the man is considered to be mentally retarded .
On the IQ being less than 70 it becomes essential to pay attention to him .
If the IQ is between 52 to 69 then the man is considered to be less mentally retarded .
The man with IQ between 36 to 51 is considered to be average mentally retarded .
If the IQ is between 20 to 35 then he is considered to be extremely mentally retarded .
The people with IQ less than 19 are considered to be extremely serious .
Making a mentally retarded child recognize himself and learn his own name is an art in itself .
For this during all the activities of the mentally retarded child like bathing , changing clothes , eating , playing etc . his name should be called .
Apart from this after showing the reflection of the child in mirror his name should be called out so that he can recognize himself .
For making the mentally retarded child learn to drink milk at first he is made to sit in front of the mirror and shown to hold the glass .
The child becomes happy by seeing himself in the mirror drinking milk .
Initially the child has to be given support but later on the child the child starts drinking on his own .
People who are mentally ill are entirely different from mentally retartded people .
The IQ of the person mentally ill is average or more than average .
The growth of the person mentally ill also takes place normally .
These people are victims of the psychological disorder and become alright through medicine or psychological treatment .
Due to psychological disorder their feelings become deformed and along with it effect is seen on the intelligence as well .
The persons mentally ill generally become alright after treatment and lead normal life at home .
Those people who do not get alright and do dangerous activities , they are kept at mental hospitals .
If the hands of the person are incapable then he would considered to be the victim of the impairement of the upper skeleton .
If the legs are incapable then he would be considered to be the victim of impairement of lower skeletan .
There are many reasons of skeletal impairment and some among these start from pregnancy itself .
Many diseases occurring to the pregnant mother become the cause of handicapedness in the child in the womb .
Many times from the time of birth the hands or feet of the child remain underdeveloped or are not there at all .
In such situation the person does maximum work with the help of assisting instruments or artificial organs .
Many times the loss of hands can be fulfilled with legs and the loss of legs with hands .
The legs of many children are twisted and deformed from birth .
Attempt should be made to straighten such deformed feet as soon as possible because the bones and joints of children are soft .
Cerebral palsy is one of the deformities occurring from birth and is sufficiently dangerous .
Due to the damage occurring in the brain some organs of the brain stop functioning .
Jaundice is a major reason of cerebral palsy .
In the state of jaundice one can be saved from this situation by giving blood to the child as soon as possible .
High fever , vommitting etc occurring in new born baby become the causes of cerebral palsy .
Apart from this many children become victims of T . .
The condition of cerebral palsy persists life long because there is no treatment for this .
But on the other side if correct opportunities are provided to the suffering child then to sufficient extent he can become responsible and a man of independent personality .
In the management of child suffering with cerebral palsy the role of parents and guardian is important .
Therefore for preparing parents for this work continuous consult and support should be given .
The guardians must be shown the way to recognize specialities of the child and to help and support them in order to fulfil their deficiencies .
There is also the need of special instruments to the child suffering with cerebral palsy .
With these instruments the children suffering with cerebral palsy are able to do many types of work easily .
Muscular dystrophy is one such disease in which the muscles continue becoming weak gradually .
Muscular dystrophyis of three types .
In the first type of the disease of muscular dystrophy the growth of the child occurs at first normally or a little gradually .
When the child is of 2 . years then he faces difficulty in walking , strolling , running , climbing etc .
Later on in muscular dystrophy difficulty comes in standing as well .
After some days the child is forced to stay lying on the bed .
In the other types the rate of the muscular dystrophy disease is less or more .
T . . is of many types , bones and joints also become its victim .
Due to the reason of T . . the rotation of the joints stops .
If T . . reaches to the spinal cord then hunch comes out and paralysis may attack .
In India around one and half crore people are affected with T . . And one fourth among these have become the victim of handicappedness .
The disease of lathyrism is a disease that occurs due to excessive use of grasspea .
Grasspea is cheap and is eaten by the poor class in the large area of Madhya Pradesh , Uttar Pradesh , Bihar , Orissa .
Due to the use of grasspea first the person feels weakness in walking and then becomes obligated to take the prop of a stick .
Despite ban this grasspea is still eaten .
During to handicappedness there is much more psychological damage than the physical damage .
In fact with the information of handicappedness a very big shock is received to the person .
If we see from the scientific point of view then all the parts of our body work independently .
The effect of a bad or inactive organ is not seen on the other healthy organs .
There are very few such diseases which show effect on other organs together .
Therefore it may be believed that the reproductive organs of the handicapped person would be normal .
He can keep his partner happy by using his reproductive power and can fulfil family duties .
Those women who have damaged spinal cord they can also become pregnant .
During pregnancy the women with damaged spinal cord may have to face various types of complications .
These complications are untimely pain , ulcer due to pressure etc .
Because of the spinal cord being damaged these women fail to feel the movement of the foetus .
The delivery in such women is possible through foreceps and other other methods .
There is no difficulty to deaf and dumb in walking .
Mentally retarded or people suffering from psychological disorders also walk easily .
There is heavy difficulty to blind people and skeletally handicapped people in movement .
There is need of training for walking to blind people and skeletally handicapped people .
In new blind people there is huge lack of confidence .
Newly blinds become anxious on slight problem and in anxiety fail to even go for little approximation .
Therefore for such blind people the training of movement is that much essential as the learning of braille .
Blind person can recognize objects to very great extent with touch .
Blind person can estimate by touching by using hands or feet .
Blind person can estimate many things by smelling inside or outside the home .
On the basis of smell the blind person estimates many shops , factories or offices .
When we walk then the effect of the forthcoming obstacles is seen on our muscles and joints .
By this also we come to know to great extent as to where we are walking .
Different types of places grassy , road , sandy area or an area filled with mud puts different types of effects on the muscles and joints of our feet .
Similarly while traveling in bus , climbing up the stairs or while opening the doors our muscles feel differently .
On the basis of these feelings the blind can come to know of his situation and direction .
The person with sight should stand in front of the blind person .
The blind person should hold the arm of the blind person by standing one step back .
The skeletally challenged person also is made to learn movement .
After the sudden skeletal handicappedness where its physical capacity decreases , there its confidence also shatters .
In such while the skeletally challenged person is need of assisting instruments to move , there he also needs someone to give the right directions .
Stick is the oldest assisting instrument in which there is the use of straight wood .
On the upper part of the stick there is one handle .
At present there is also the use of aluminium stick which is light and strong .
Below this aluminium tip there is rubber tip which keeps a good hold on the floor .
When wheels are attached to the normal chair then it is called wheel chair .
After sitting on this chair the victim of serious handicappedness also can come up to some distance .
Motorised wheel chair for going inside and outside of house and office are also available which have brakes as well .
At present the complaint of contamination in things for eating and drinking are becoming common .
Ghee , oil , milk , spices and in fact in vegetables as well as the use of chemicals is a serious problem .
Certainly by consuming contaminated things we are straight away inviting diseases .
The chemicals mixed in these contaminated things affect our immune system directly , by which the problems of dehydration , vomiting etc may occur .
This way by the use of substances mixed with these chemicals there is a risk of the occurrence of the diseases connected to nervous system etc .
With contaminated things not just liver , but the effect is also seen on intestines .
We can overcome this problem , provided we stay cautious .
In order to stay away from the ill effects of contaminated food materials we must at first try to buy goods of good quality .
An alternative from being saved from contaminated food materials may be branded items , but many times complaints may arise even in them .
Therefore for you organic foods would be safe .
The biggest benefit of organic food products is this that no type of chemical substances can be used in them .
On the other hand the complaint of the mixing of fruits and vegetables and the use of chemicals to ripen them is also coming forward regularly .
This may also prove harmful with respect to health .
As such from the point of view of safety you must eat the fruit after peeing them off .
Similar things you can do with vegetables as well .
Not just this , you wash fruits and vegetables many times before use , so that , more and more color on them gets washed .
Just nutritive food is not essential , but staying cautious is also essential so that the chemicals do not go inside with nutrition in the body .
The problem of handicappedness is ancient and the efforts of their diagnosis are also equally ancient .
The level of technical development has been having continuous influence on these efforts .
The National institute for the Visually Handicapped have developed various types of assisting instruments for various purposes .
For the higher education of handicapped people latest braille slates , tailor 's frame , instruments to solve numericals and algebra , and kit helpful in geometry have also been prepared .
For the handicapped persons the set of pictures helpful in the study of physics have also been developed .
With the help of all these assisting instruments related to education the blind person can read new and every type of subjects .
For general blind persons tools for threading a needle , for shorthand etc have also been developed .
For the physical development and the entertainment of blind people many things of games have also been developed .
For the blind people the ringing balls in cricket and football etc have been developed .
Tactile chess for sitting down and playing , cards of braille , pocket frame etc have been manufactured .
For the locomotion of blind people the stick which is brought in use have also been developed .
Although the braille script has been of support for the blind people from long time but with time improvements have come in this as well .
Now one after the other such machines have come in which the typing of braille takes place as fast as possible .
The person types normal words on the computer and simultaneously the attached machine continues taking out the print in braille .
Now in less time newspaper , letters , magazines or books can be prepared .
Where such machines are being imported from foreign institutions there in India as well many organizations are doing research in this direction .
Voice synthesizer has also become common now and has become available in less price .
Whatever is fed into the computer , the attached voice synthesizer reads it aloud .
Previously the blind people used to get scared with calculation and maths .
now after the invention of voice calculator not just the anxiety of the blind people has vanished , but now they can also work at the place of calculations .
At present in our country there is adequate arrangement of making artificial leg or calliper etc according to severed legs or weak legs .
The leg is severed below the knee or above , the artificial leg can be fixed .
similarly to whatever extent of the leg is weak or distorted the callipers can be prepared and these are very helpful .
These callipers can be worn for many years easily .
In order to make club foot straight initially and or the making of special shoes according to them is also easy .
When the person becomes handicapped after becoming victim of a disease or accident then his treatment is done in various ways .
Among these various types of surgical treatment , physical treatment , physiotherapy , occupational therapy etc are included .
At present to great extent benefit has been observed in various cases of polio , leprosy , accidents .
In the country there is a web of the centres of ALIMCO and Mahavir Handicapped Institute where every type of artificial organ and calliper etc are available .
Through the surgical treatment the effort of making the patients of cerebral palsy normal is ongoing .
Due to the development in medical science the lost eye sight is retieved once again and the diseases do make the person blind .
The biggest example of this is earler people in large numbers used to become blind due to cataract .
Now with simple surgery the treatment of cataract is done .
Through the intra occular lens the person continues to take benefit of the complete sight capacity .
At present with the surgery transparency is brought back .
In the schools through the regular treatments of children prevention is applied on the diseases of eyes and the increasing diseases are corrected .
In various cases when the person starts living his life after considering himself blind then with the surgery of cornea he starts seeing .
Organisations like Mahavir Vikalang Sahayata Samiti have provided artificial organs to people by visiting villages and investigating on large scale .
Similarly in such camps the surgery of cataract of the eyes of people has been done successfully .
One more solution of the diagnosis of the problem of handicappedness is this that so much facilities and concessions should be given to the handicapped people so that there could be sufficient compensation to the losses occurring due to physical disabilities .
According to the order issued by the Railway Ministry blind people , physically challenged , deaf - dumb and mentally retarded people would get 75 percent concession on the fares of first class , second class and sleeper class .
Also in season ticket the handicapped people get 50 percent concession .
Leaving deaf - dumb the assistants traveling with all the other type of handicaps also get this much concession .
In air travel only Indian Airlines gives 50 percent concession to the blind people .
In order to give more and more employment to the handicapped people they are provided with 7 percent reservation in dealership .
The handicapped people need assisting tools in order to carry out normal work .
Therefore poor handicaps should be given assistance to buy tools .
People with the monthly income of twelve hundred rupees get the aid equipments worth 3600 rupees .
Volunteer institutions are given aids to educate children afflicted with cerebral palsy and mentally undeveloped children and for preparation of teachers and other experts to rehabilitate them .
In the same way institutions working for the rehabilitation of people after the treatment of leprosy and bringing them in the meanstream are also given up to 90 percent economical support .
The institutions that run special schools for the disabled people of different varieties are given economical aids up to 90 percent .
The districts which do not have special schools , this aid is given on a priority basis .
Besides this different aids programs are also run through district rehabilitation centres , regional rehabilitation centres .
Trachoma disease occurs due to a bacteria .
Trachoma disease gets spreading through the dirty hands , polluted towels etc. .
Flies also play an important role in spreading trachoma disease .
Trachoma disease is more in those areas where poor people live and there is a plethora of dust .
The areas having a lack of water also have trachoma in plenty .
Open and dirty toilets , open sewers , twittering of the flies also increase the number of trachoma disease .
In trachoma disease there is burning in the eye and the eye waters .
Due to the disease of trachoma the eyes also get reddened .
In such situation it is essential to keep the eyes clean .
Also by taking the advice of the doctor the treatment of trachoma should be started .
In the pain of the neck in yogasana the neck should be moved backwards for treatment .
Gradually bend the neck forwards .
Let the chin touch the voice box .
Rotate the neck from left to rigt and right to left with mild jerks .
In the pain of neck do sarpasana , bhujangasana , dhanurashana .
In the pain of the neck do pranayama and meditation .
In the pain of the neck move in open , fresh air .
The patients with neck pain should not do much mental work at the time of treatment .
Excess burden or tension should come on the neck , such work should not be done .
In the pain of neck tension free daily sleep of 6 . hours is very essential .
In the pain of neck attention should be paid on the right posture of sitting and sleeping .
If the patients of neck pain are standing then they should stand erect .
During the situation of sitting the back of the patient of the neck pain should absolutely be staright .
The patient of the neck pain should use hard slab for sleeping .
Do not use pillow below the neck .
While doing any work the spinal cord of the patient should lay straight .
This way the patient of the neck pain should get quick relief by balanced diet , natural treatment .
Abstain from eating food in the roadside eateries .
They use low quality oil for many days .
Clear soup and green vegetable are helpful in increasing appetite .
Abstain from naan and rumali roti because maida is used in them .
In their place eat missi roti  made of thick grains  and fulke .
In food take only one gravy vegetable .
The meaning of more gravy in food is excess fat .
It is even said , little gravy is sufficient .
Choose one type of food .
To not complement bhel and kachori with chopsey and pork windalu with sambhar wada .
The diet of three dishes is sufficient .
Escape from diet of five dishes .
State clearly that you want food cooked in steam or you want deep fried , fried , cooked at high temperature or roasted food .
In food take wine or water instead of cola .
Wine can complement with Indian food .
Cola can give rise to gas related problems .
Contaminated water or vapor rich water has ill effects on digestive system .
These days due to gas , bile and phlegm separately or by the combination of two or all the three several types of disease must be arising .
Therefore in monsoon season fire must be safeguarded cautiously .
Due to the subduction of fire there are lethal consequences on health .
Due to the deformation of fire the person suffers from many types of disease .
During rainy season one should abstain from the consumption of fire enhancing medicines , gas reducer and digestion enhancer medicines .
One should drink mixing the juice of lentil etc . old barley , wheat , shali rice , shadras , mastu , black salt , pippali , pippalamool , chavya , chitrak and sonth .
The water of well or rain or boiled water should be consumed .
During the days of excess rain sour , mineral rich and fragrant cereals should be used .
In dryness honey rich easily digestive substance should be consumed .
Take bath after applying fragrant oil etc , wear the clothes after using perfume etc .
The clothes should be kept in the sun from time to time .
In the medicine world among the various popular methods of treatment the place of natural treatment is important .
Our body is a self controlled active tool .
The God has made the arrangement of self defense , health safety inside our body itself .
That system in which there is method of staying free of disease by supporting nature , there are rules that only is called natural treatment .
When people feel restless and uncomfortable after becoming infested with indigestion , weakness and rot due to wrong life-style , incompatible and untimely food then to get rid of them they use various medicines , injections .
Through these medicines , injections even more dirt gets accumulated in the body .
The disease is not eliminated by medicines .
One symptom of the complication gets suppressed and becomes the reason of another disease .
The body tries for its own defense .
The nature tries comprehensively to remove the dirt present in the body .
Naturopathy helps in removing and throwing away this dirt from our body .
Naturopathy makes the person healthy , strong and full of glow .
Fast , juice , fruits , balanced diet natural lifestyle are helpful in naturopathy .
With the method of air , sunlight - water , massage , exercise , pranayam any disease is destroyed from the root .
State clearly that you want food cooked in steam or you want deep fried , fried , cooked at high temperature or roasted food .
Like in the villages as pollution arises in the drains and streets of villages disease is produced due to them .
Likewise dirt is accumulated in the body .
This dirt of the body can not be excreted through the medium of toilet , urine sweat etc and starts percolating inside .
That dirt of the body is the root of all the diseases .
If your disease is not able to be rectified by any medicine then get a new life by adopting new natural treatment .
Health is natural and disease is unnatural .
When we follow the rules of body and life then the health is natural .
When we ignore the rules of body and life , overlook then the disease is unnatural .
The normal reaction of the normal situation of life force is health and abnormal reaction is disease .
This condition of abnormal reaction is the reason of disease alone .
Therefore we can say that those symptoms because of which the situations of disease are produced they should be corrected .
No effort should be taken in order to suppress the symptoms through traditional contemporary method and medicines .
Traditional treatment method has always followed the short - term treatment policy .
The excess pressure of traditional treatment stays on treatment .
Traditional treatment method does not rely on the philosophy of staying free of disease .
We know that for the treatment of disease traditional treatment method has left no stone unturned in every possible research .
The treatment of disease depends on the basis as to in what form do we take our disease .
There is immense attack on the body in the form of medicine , injection etc .
By that action procedure the patient becomes disease free , this is the general belief among people .
On the basis of this wrong belief the use of all types of medicines are used on the diseases .
That is simple cough and cold or dangerous cancer disease .
The nature tries to maintain balance in the body .
In the human body health and disease are two separate self religions in the human body .
Natural medicine never claims that it can free from all the stages of all types of dangerous diseases .
But it definitely lays stress on the fact that by understanding the creative process of nature dependent rules certainly the people suffering with dangerous diseases can be helped .
The fact is that at present the extent to which people have the knowledge of destructive forces that much less they have the knowledge about the process of life force .
In the natural treatment the treatment is done of the patient and not of the disease .
On the occurrence of disease for the treatment of disease it is important to stick to the rules of health and essential to stay away from the habits which produce disease , matter and diet which produce the same .
By abiding by the rules of health only all types of diseases are cured .
By following the rules of health the treatment of the dangerous disease like cancer also is possible in the present times .
For the treatment of disease adopt any where and any type of method .
Eat medicines , but if you do not restricy yourself in food habits then the disease would not be corrected .
Someone consumes alcohol , is in the habit of smoking cigarette , bidi and his liver has become infectious , is suffering from rheumatism , arthritis , psyctic disease etc .
For these diseases the person eats different types of medicines .
Natural treatment is also done .
But if they do not quit alcohol , cigarette , bidi etc then one can not get rid of the disease .
By spending money of lacs and crores one can not free oneself of disease , till the time one does not follow the rules of health .
Natural treatment is proud that the treatment of all types of diseases is possible in natural treatment .
If the person will get the treatment done and do not quit the habits leading to disease , then is its treatment possible ?
This is also true that if the person gets the treatment done by staying in any natural hospital , where he is given diet and treatment under strict vigilence .
The bad habits of the patient are removed with strictness .
In that duration of staying in hospital it is natural to get relief .
After coming back from the hospital again old habits , eating habits , and the rules of healthy life style are left , then again there is attack of the diseases .
The nature has given immense power to every living being to stay disease free .
In order to rid us from diseases modern scientific development makes us aware of the behavioural and non destructive enriched energy of the nature .
If once you become complete by the nature and follow its rules then you would always appear healthy and full of lively youth .
In order to maintain health balanced diet , self control , yoga and exercise are essential .
Good health is ultimate bliss .
The only key to health is the regular following of decided balanced diet by the diet specialists , and yogasana by the yoga specialists .
The secret to long life is in this only .
Not just long leaf , also of good health and youthful life .
It would be very justified to call the modern age as the pollution age , because at every step there is pollution .
Iron and steel industries , aviation , motor and railways , deafness of the ears due to the noise of loud - speakers etc , disorder of blood circulation , irritation due to staying in tension , beating of the heart , increase of blood pressure , diseases like cancer etc .
Diseases like tuberculosis , cancer , influenza , asthma , of throat and trachea etc are occuring due to the poisonous gases of motor cars and iron and steel industries and the spreading of pesticide chemicals in the plants in the fields .
The residents of those places where the atmosphere is covered with viruses , dust , smoke , moisture , fog and cloud are found to be suffering from tuberculosis , cancer , nervous weakness , rheumatism , blood disorders etc .
The effluents of poisonous pesticides , plastic , dye , and the factories of rubber the dirty drains of the city and the poisonous substances of chemical fertilizers are polluting the sources of water and the diseases like diarrhoea , piles and of skin are spreading .
In the pollution of the earth flies , mosquitoes and many harmful pests are being produced and are inviting the diseases like tuberculosis , gastritis , tetanus , yellow fever , malaria , dysentery , diorrhoea , cancer etc .
The edible items produced with chemical fertilizers make men and animals suffer from lethal diseases like cancer etc .
The use of various types of chemicals on plants and cereals produce many types of dangerous diseases after reaching in our body .
Due to the use of wrong utensils also the food items become poisonous .
Contamination by greedy businessmen and the use of saccharine in drinking items make the civilized men suffer from dangerous diseases .
There is more expenditure of life - force in digesting more food and elimination of disorders produced due to them .
By this its loss becomes definite .
One is required to work in order to lead life .
But rest is essential on getting tired .
Wandering uselessly , without any aim , tiring the one 's body is foolishness only and also with it there is also the reduction of life - force .
Due to staying idle the physical and mental powers start getting destroyed very fast .
Work is life , worklessness is death .
Flowing water is pure , but the water standing at one place only produces foul smell .
The brain of lazy , the house of disease .
Like due to not using the motor - car it gets rusted .
Due to working till late at night or partying or passing the entire night keeping awake wastage of life force is essential .
Due to keeping awake till late at night one can become the victim of mental disorder and sleeplessness etc .
According the view of Prof . . Clark all our curing medicines are poison and as a result every dose of medicine reduces the life - force of the patient .
Allopathy suppresses the diseases with medicines and produces poisonous situation in the body .
The destruction of life force starts with the use of medicines .
The body continues to grow continuously for approximately upto 25 - 30 years .
The work of intelligence and construction is also finished in this period only .
Those men and women who destroy semen and menses in unnatural way , there is no production of glaze , fame , revolution , intelligence and strength .
Because of being extremely weak many dangerous diseases may be produced in men and women .
According to medical science one drop of semen is produced by 40 drops of blood .
According to Ayurveda one drop of semen is produced by 80 drops of blood .
According to yogashastra after semen discharge the death comes near and after it is digested in the body life is saved .
Everyday in the morning clap in such a manner that the fingers do not collide among themselves .
The eye sight will increase with this and reduction would come in the increased power of the spectacles .
Just after waking up in the morning after facing in the east or north direction keep your palms on your eyes , face , chest , elbow and knee after rubbing briskly .
Due to this the eye sight will improve and there will not be any pain in the joints .
In the morning going to toilet after drinking water without rinsing mouth one is relieved from all the diseases related to stomach .
While taking bath take bath by keeping the mouth filled with water and while drying yourself throw the water out due to this one will never get cold in winters .
After bathing putting oil in between the toes keeps the memory good .
After bathing sit on a wooden board facing east and after closing the eyes pronounce the word om .
Due to this the brain feels reverberation and the memory stays sharp .
The food should be taken by sitting on the wooden board facing east or north direction .
Keep the food also on the wooden board .
This way by eating the food sitting on the wooden board digestion related problems are kept at bay .
By drinking water while sitting and milk by standing always there would not be any pain in the knee .
In winters by applying oil on the sole of the children they could be saved from pneumonia .
At night in copper vessel put 2 . leaves of basil after squeezing and fill water in it .
In the morning before going to toilet drink that water of the copper vessel .
By drinking that water of copper vessel one gets relief from constipation .
At the time of shitting keep your mouth closed and breathe through nose .
At the time of shitting keep your teeth firmly tight .
By doing such there would not be any disease related to teeth and life long the teeth would not fall .
By blowing shell or hearing the shell music cholesterol will not increase and the patients of asthma will also be relieved .
At the end of bath put lemon and glycerine rich water on the body .
By putting lemon and glycerine rich water on the body the body and hair will stay healthy .
Appetite dies due to tea , then constipation , giddiness in head and the attacks of unconsciousness start .
After drinking tea the amount of uric acid in the urine gets doubled .
After drinking tea the tiredness does not decrease , instead increases .
Memory is destroyed with tea - coffee .
The use of anima can be done in all the diseases .
In order to remove foreign particles accumulated in the intestines and to increase the power of the intestines the use of anima is done .
For anima generally the quantity of water is from 500 m . . To 1500 m . .
This quantity of water is also dependent on the acceptance of the patient .
The quantity of water which the patient can retain in his intestine , only that much of water he should be allowed to take .
There are many methods of taking anima .
In one condition after lying flat and leaving the abdomen region loose both the knees are folded upwards .
In the second condition by lying on the left side the right leg should be folded from the knee .
The pot of anima should be kept three feet above the bench .
Fill warm water in the pot .
Before taking anima some water is removed from the nozzle so that the air in the tube comes out .
By putting vaseline or oil in the catheter of the nozzle is entred in the anus gradually .
After this the stopper is opened , so that the water starts going inside .
While taking anima the stomach should gently be rubbed .
After the entire water has gone inside the tube is taken out and the stomach is rubbed from right to left .
Deep breaths should be taken while taking anima .
After taking anima one should lie down on the left and right or should take light walk , due to which the excreta gets dissolved in the water completely .
On going to the toilet while excreting the excreta should be allowed to come out on its own .
There is no need of taking special effort .
It is not essential that in one go the bowel gets cleared .
For this before anima soil is put on the stomach and afterwards bath is taken only upto the waist .
On the formation of excess gas lemon is added in water .
Neem water , honey water is given specially in intense excreta obstruction .
If the anima to increase strength to the intestine is given then cold water should be used .
The water of anima should not be much hot , attention should be paid on this .
It is good if before taking anima the warmth of the water is estimated by putting hand in the water .
The place at which anima is given , toilet should be near it .
Anima should not be given of more than 1500 m . . of water .
Before taking anima one should use the toilet still if need arises in between then anima should be stopped and one should go to the toilet .
Everyday empty stomach or three - four hours after eating anima should be taken .
For anima the water should be clean , hygienic , boiled .
What is balanced diet ?
Form food the only aim of man is not just to fill stomach , gain health or fulfil taste , but also to bring about mind , character and spiritual growth .
The interest of man towards various types of foods is the symbol of his conduct and recognition .
Therefore in food the consumption of those types of foods should be done which is helpful in physical , mental , principle , social and spiritual enhancement .
Balanced diet develops love , affection , friendship , forgiveness , tenderness , non violence peace etc properties .
Grow the feeling of respect and honor toward the humans .
Those foods in which there is no fulfillment of the above mentioned things and the consequences come the opposite instead , that food can not be called balanced .
What type is nutritive diet ?
In the food the eleme  nts providing energy , strength and heat to the body like proteins , glucose , fat , minerals , vitamins etc should be present in proper ratio and sufficient quantity .
Due to which the growth of good cells in the body continues to take place .
According to one 's own financial ability , the selection of those substances may be done depending on the likeness and availabilty and personal necessity from the substances of various categories .
Nutritive substances are also present in vegetarian food materials .
Today many doctors and people consider consuming nonvegetarian food for protein and calorie due to misleading advertisements .
But in many vegetarian food materials also protein , calorie , vitamins and nutritive substances are available in sufficient quantity .
In nonvegetarian items  the outer part of pulses , cereals etc  there is no quantity of fiber present at all .
This has been ascertained by the scientists that fiber has a lot of importance in preventing diseases .
Vitamins are also essential for our health .
The source of these vitamins are vegetable substances only .
The main source of food for animals and humans is the food obtained by agriculture or plants .
The proteins which are found in meat , those also are obtained from plants alone .
Therefore getting nutrition directly from vegetable substances is better than from that secondary nutrition which in animal meat has also been obtained from vegetable substances .
Some people spread this rumor that egg is a complete nutrition .
Vitamin . , carbohydrates and fiber are not found at all in eggs .
Egg , meat , fish etc are acidic food due to which there is removal of calcium from the bones and due to this type of loss occurring of calcium it takes longer for the bone to rejoin after fracture .
There is also more cholesterol in eggs .
Any type of toxic substance can not arise in balanced diet prepared by mixing fruits , green vegetables , various types of lentils , seeds and milk .
Its main reason is that when an animal dies then it becomes dead substance .
This does not apply to vegetables .
If any vegetable is cut even half and its half part is put inside the ground then it will grow again in the form of vegetable or tree .
This is possible only because vegetable is a living substance .
This thing can not be said for a lamb , goat or chicken .
From the other special sources it has been found this that when an animal is killed then it becomes afraid and the toxic substance released due to fear sprears in his body .
That same toxic substance reaches the body of those people in the form of meat who eat them .
Our body is not completely capable of excreting all those toxic substances .
The acid base balance is essential in food .
Many doctors believe that the reason of disease in body is the imbalance of acid-base .
It is such belief of doctors that in our body there are approximately 80 percent are basic substances and approximately 20 percent are acidic substances .
But in our food attention is not paid on the ratio of acid - base .
It is the belief that in the peels of maximum fruits and vegetables generally there is more basic substance and in the inner part there is acidic substance more .
Therefore the doctors advice to eat the edible substances without removing the peels .
But in the present times due to the excessive use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides the consumption of cereals and vegetables without washing them properly and with peels may also become the reason of harm because of some part of poison remaining in them .
The aim of saying is this only that instead of giving importance to one sided thought with respect to food , we should take decision after thinking on every side with multiple point of view as per the weather and physical needs .
But in no case the natural doctrines of Nature should be ignored .
According to Chinese Panch Tatva doctrines various tastes have relations with different organs of the body .
Natural doctors have such beliefs that liver and pancreas are affected by sour taste .
Hot taste has relation with lungs and large intestine .
Sweet taste has direct relation with spleen and gall bladder .
The heart and small intestines etc are affected by bitter taste .
With these tastes not just our organs get affected but the nutrition of these organs also take place .
The doctors consider the balance of taste in foood alone as the base of health .
The doctors treat by balancing various tastes .
The food should be according to the weather .
Those food materials which are obtained maximum from the nature in that month , is generally considered to be good from the point of view of health .
Maximum birds - animals which do not accumulate food and lead a carefree life lead there life on the basis of available fruits , leaves alone .
The nature gives complete support in order to keep each person healthy .
All the animals eat only those things , which is available around them .
Animals do not import food materials from other places .
The laws of nature are equal for every one poor and rich .
Therefore the consumption of expensive , unseasonal , imported food material is always useful for health , is completely false .
Balanced diet itself does the work of medicine .
Such is the belief of dieticians that the relation of maximum physical diseases is due to food related ill habits , carelessness and inattentiveness .
The chief reason of this is our ignorance about right food , greed for taste , lack of timely thoughtfulness , lack of prudence , immoral conduct , selfish point of view etc .
In various medical methods attentiveness towards diet is an important part of treatment .
In natural treatment diet only is given the maximum importance for health and treatment .
According to the point of view of natural doctors and dieticians food alone is the medicine .
tea is a sweet poison .
At present there is the custom of tea in all the houses .
To the extent that the reception of guests is incomplete without tea .
What are you drinking in the name of tea ?
What are you making your guests drink , if they come to know of it even slightly then people will run away from having tea at house .
If they are more intelligent then they will reduce visiting your house .
You say that whatever tea I drink , that tea only is given to others , make the guests drink , and not giving any poison .
Actually in the name of tea you yourself are consuming poison , and making the others also drink tea .
You do not know that dishonest businessmen have mixed wood dust , sand , gravel and even the used tea leaves in the tea after coloring again .
One survey was given in the daily newspaper of dainik Bhasker of 20 January 1999 of Wednsday that from the samples collected from 25 shops in the entire country 64 percent samples were found contaminated .
These samples of tea do not fulfil the desired conditions of food contamination control law .
The interesting thing is that there is hardly any judicial procedure and someone has been punished related to contamination in tea .
For ' the Consumer Guidance of India ' foreign particles have been found in 60 percent samples of loose tea .
These foreign particles are lethal and dangerous for the health of human health .
The colors by which these leaves are colored , in them the chemicals capable of producing cancer are found .
In tea caffeine , tenic . - complex and scented volatile oil are there .
Tea , coffee , cocoa , intoxicating things are very harmful .
In these substances there is not a single substance to enhance blood .
These reduce digestive power .
Many types of poisons are found in tea .
The quantity of tannin in tea is 18 % .
Tannin produces wound , gas in the stomach .
There is 2 . 74 % caffeine in tea .
Acid is produced from caffeine , which weakens the kidney .
The quantity of thene in tea is 3 % .
Thene produces heaviness in lungs and brain .
Choletyle is harmful for eyes .
Acidity is produced from carbolic acid .
Mammine reduces digestive ability .
Sinozen increases paralysis and insomnia disease .
Stinayak produces blood disorder and impotence .
Aromathic produces dryness in intestines .
The quantity of auchjelik which is produced from the body in a day four times of that is produced from one cup of tea .
Among the list of the most poisonous substances tea is placed at the top .
Due to tea there is the disease of insomnia disease and memory power is desroyed .
Due to tea the ability to hold is reduced in urinary bladder .
By drinking tea three times a day tension in muscles , nervous disorders , worry , fear , anxiety and brain diseases occur .
When the need of rest to be given to the tired brain arises then , then by bringing insomnia tea and coffee make the brain work forcibly .
the result of which is this that the brain gradually becomes inefficient .
Because of tea and coffee for once the person gets to work with a lot of vigor , but afterwards feels more tiredness .
The diseases like impotence , wet dreams etc arise in those consuming more tea - coffee .
Tea , is even more harmful than alcohol .
Papapaya is an evergreen fruit and is available in the market easily .
Vitamin A is found in papaya in abundant quantity .
VitaminC is also found in sufficient quantity in papaya .
As the fruit of papaya ripens in the same manner VitaminC also increases in it .
In raw papaya VitaminC 40 to 90 milligram , in half ripe papaya 50 to 90 milligram and in ripe papaya 60 to 140 milligram is found in 100 grams .
In papaya sucrose and VitaminC is found in more quantity from the month of May to October .
By making the digestive system strong papaya removes the diorders of the stomach .
Raw papaya is useful in diseases like dysentery , liver disorders , piles etc .
In the juice of papaya the substance named papeine is found which proves to be extremely helpful in the digestion of food .
Those people who have the complaint of constipation they should also consume papaya regularly .
Papaya is also useful in the diseases of eyes , because vitamin A is found in sufficient quantity in this .
The disease of night blindness is cured by the consumption of papaya .
Papaya is useful in blood purification , jaundice , irregular menstruation as well .
The juice of raw papaya is extremely useful for people suffering from tape worm .
Those women who get irregular menses , they should consume the juice of papaya continuously every day and their menstrual flow would become regular .
The papeine substance found in papaya proves useful in the disease of rib and enhancement of lymph gland .
If there are worms in the stomach then by consuming 20 grams juice of raw papaya morning - evening regularly one will get benefitted .
In liver or sclerosis one gets benefit by eating raw papaya with cumin seed , pepper and rock salt powder .
One will get benefitted in acidity , constipation , dysentery and the swelling of intestines by the regular consumption of papaya mixed with rock salt , cumin seed and lemon juice .
In piles eat papaya everyday in the morning empty stomach and you will get rid of piles .
The root cause of piles is constipation .
For skin diseases also papaya is an excellent medicine .
If you are suffering with itching then you should take out the juice of raw papaya and apply .
With this one will get rid of itching and the skin will become soft and radiant as well .
A substance called arzinyne is found in papaya , those women whose reproductive capacity is less they should consume 200 milligram to 300 milligram of papaya juice everyday .
Curd has the power to reduce cholesterol , therefore it is boon for heart patients .
Curd is also beneficial for the patients of high blood pressure and kidney .
Generally people consider milk to be the most nutritive and complete food , but curd is more beneficial than this .
It is said regarding this that if a person takes one bowl of curd every day then he stays diseases free and healthy for long life .
In Ayurveda also one gets the elaboration on the benefits of curd .
There are proteins , vitamins , calcium , minerals and carbohydrate etc in rich quantity in curd .
But at the time of consuming curd one should keep in mind that the curd should not be sour .
Second at the time of morning breakfast one should consume curd .
There are many benefits of consuming curd .
In loss of appetite by consuming fried cumin seed and rock salt in lassi one gets benefitted .
On the rupture of nose blisters one is benefitted by putting the paste of butter after adding little bit of camphor .
If you are worried of obesity then regularly consume curd or chhachh , this reduces the fat of your body .
Curd proves to be helpful in prevnting the growth of cells in cancer .
Chhachh is the panacea for stomach disorders .
There is the destruction of stomach diseases by the consumption of curd .
The consumption of curd makes one get rid of constipation .
Together with being a tasty fruit guava is also full of many medicinal properties within it .
The treatment of many types of diseases is possible through guava .
In toothache one gets relief by chewing guava leaf or gargling it after boiling .
Guava is destroyer of constipation .
One hour after food by eating lemon , salt and black pepper in guava , toilet comes very smoothly .
By eating guava after roasting in sand coughing is reduced .
By applying kattha after mixing in the juice of guava leaf the inflammation of the mouth is destroyed .
By eating candy sugar with guava two or three times in a day dysentery is reduced .
If there is headache then before sun rise apply a paste of raw guava after rubbing on stone .
By drinking the soft leaves of guava after grinding in water like sherbet one is benefitted in the disease of gall bladder .
In skin diseases and itching , eczema , ringworm , pimples and acne etc one guava should be eaten regularly in the afternoon time .
There is relief after the use of guava for thirty days .
If there is piorrhoea in teeth then store and keep in bottle after grinding finely and filtering through a pece of silk cloth the peel of the raw fruit of guava 500 gram , alum 10 gram , black pepper 10 gram and rock salt 10 gram .
Brush morning and evening with this powder , you will get relief in some days .
Sugar is white poison .
One special thing has been said about sugar is that from the point of view of vitamins it does not have any type of speciality .
Sugar is only a type of sweetness , no type of nutritive substance is obtained from it .
The heart is damaged by eating sugar .
In 1949 one Japanese doctor had researched on sugar .
As a result of the use of excess sugar the disease of hypoglucamia disease has spread in Europe and America .
In the patient suffering with hypoglucamia initially he feels physical weakness , then there is false hunger and then sweating .
The body of the patient at times starts shivering and he also becomes unconscious .
The doctors have said that for this disease sugar only is responsible .
Due to sugar there is also a type of indigestion and constipation .
After the arrival of sugar in stomach it produces a type of burning in stomach and intestines .
This happens due to the acid produced during the digestion of sugar .
The substances rich in sugar produce 20 % more acidity .
The teeth are damaged due to sugar .
In fact the acid which is produced from the sugar stuck to the teeth , the damage to the teeth occurs due to that reason .
The teeth of children eating fatty sweet substances like cake , biscuit , chocolate , ice cream etc become bad and diseases fast .
Due to sugar , skin diseases also occur , such has been found from researches .
Headche and migraine disease occurs due to the reason of sugar and chocolate .
Due to the reason of careless type of diet only the person becomes victim of migraine , such one American doctor has proven .
Who after experimenting said that headache occurs due to the substance named tyramine of chocolate .
Second interesting thing is that in people who smoke the chances of diabetes and heart - disease is especially more .
Behind this belief sugar only is chiefly accountable .
In the tobacco used in cigarettes there are poisonous substances like tar and nicotine as well .
If the nicotine substance is reduced from the cigarette then also the heart and lungs would be damaged seriously due to the sugar present in it .
In villages people do not smoke cigarettes , but smoke hubble - bubble .
The people of village mix jaggery in tobacco .
The smoke produced from sugar mixed tobacco becomes acid rich .
This acid rich smoke harms the lungs .
Similarly this type of tobacco consisting of sugar is called flu - cured tobacco in English .
The tobacco which is used in cigarette , 17 % is sugar .
In the imported cigarettes of famous companies 15 % is sugar only .
Remember , we eat extra sugar through bottled drinks , biscuits , chocolates and canned fruits , ice creams and sweets .
How should the food be in rough cold ?
Wrong food becomes the reason of cold in at least nine out of ten people .
Generally people eat anything that comes in front .
People eat all types of things together .
The question of food is extremely important for the patient of cold .
Chew the food very well and eat gradually .
Abiding by it is essential both for the patient as well as healthy .
Cold occurs due to the consumption of wrong food .
Wrong food produces more than expected indigestion .
gas and acidity is produced by indigestion .
Later on poison is produced due to the rotting of food in the intestine .
Some portion of these undigested food gets absorbed by the blood because of which it becomes polluted and acidic .
That blood travels in all the parts of the body and makes each corner diseased .
When all the veins of blood and body become polluted then some or the other disease should definitely occur and often it gets manifested in the form of cold .
Be light eater in food .
Prepare the food very plain .
Eat fresh things sufficiently and abstain from pickle , jelly , chutney and canned food to the extent possible .
Eat milk , cream and paneer in small quantity .
These are good things , but the experience of the patients of cold is that due to their increased consumption the disease increases .
In cold people of more age , who eat many things , they should not use milk for more than once in a day .
Those whose eye color has become bad they should not eat cream or paneer till the time its color becomes clear .
Eat some fresh fruits and raw vegetables daily and certainly .
The reason for the suggestion to use fresh fruit and raw vegetables is this that iron , calcium carbonate , soda etc essential natural minerals are obtained from them in such way in which the body needs them .
Fresh fruit and raw vegetables purify the body and they make the blood basic .
It is essential for the blood to be basic .
Fruit and vegetable prevent the food from getting rotten in the intestine and this way also support in keeping the body disease free as well .
Meat or meat made food should not be eaten .
In vegetarian food all types of meat and fish should also be counted .
Protein is required in order to maintain the body .
If the quantity of protien exceeds the required quantity then it can soon start destruction in the body that other food materials do not do .
Make a rule of not eating too many things by mixing them together .
People in one go eat pulses , rice , roti , butter  ghee  , meat , potato , one two vegetables and upto some sweets .
Maximum there should be four - five things in meal .
Have food at fixed time .
The patients of cold should consume vegetable juices in huge quantity .
Sweet potato are heavy , their use should be done in place of roti and rice .
In the lunch roti of wheat , bajra , jowar or maize and rice and around quarter kilogram raw vegetables should be kept .
For raw vegetables carrot , radish , cucumber , onion , tomato , lettuce , cabbage and two - three things which are able to be eaten raw should be taken .
The vegetables should be cut small and mixed .
In the supper there should be some chapatis , one - two vegetables and some fruits .
Why do you get tired ?
Tiredness has become a normal disease of modern age .
Every where tired people are visible .
The labourer is physically tired , intellectuals are tired in mental way .
Working women have become tired due to bearing double responsibitlity .
In this fast paced world every one is tired .
One disease is the tiredness occuring without any reason .
Some person who does no do any physical and mental work leading to tiredness , then also every time tiredness keeps them surrounded .
When this feeling of tiredness enters you permanently , then the problem becomes more complex .
According to psychologists , the condition of the reduction of interests and desires only is tiredness .
Which serially decreases and increases in proportion to interests and wishes .
In normal meaning the physical and mental tiredness of man may be considered tiredness .
In scientific language this situation may be called called neursthania .
Among the mental disorders due to tiredness the names of worry , tension , boredom and inner conflict can be counted .
These things are common in the stressful life of the present world .
Those people who are not able to strike balance of the situations on the mental level , they finally become the victims of tiredness .
More than the relation which tiredness has with body , more than that it is related to your psychological state .
If you are suffering with disease like fatigue then you should introspect your entire life - style .
After finding the reasons of tensions honestly try to remove them .
For escaping from tiredness stay happy and cheerful always .
Whether the tiredness is physical or mental , it can be removed by bringing holistic change in life - style , food , regular excercise and mental level .
In the scene of unusual fatigue take the advice of your doctor .
It is essential to abstain from the diseases of acidity and ulcer .
Abstain from the consumption of smoking , tobacco , pan masala , alcohol etc .
In the symptoms of acidity are burning in the stomach , pain with burning , burning in the chest upto neck , sour water in mouth , production of more acid , burning in the stomach like fire or stove .
Vomitting , loss of appetite , fear from having food due to pain , swelling of stomach , heart burn etc are the symptoms of acidity .
That wound is called peptic ulcer which is formed in the upper part of the small intestine  deudenum  , stomach or the lower part of the food pipe .
These are serially called deudenal ulcer , gastric ulcer and oesophageal ulcer .
Keep in mind , that it is not important that every patient having pain in the upper part of the stomach should have ulcer or acidity .
For the diagnosis of the symptoms of the deudenal ulcer of patient some laboratory tests are done after the extensive information and physical examination .
In these tests stool tests , endoscopy and borium x - ray are main .
If the patient is consuming smoke , alcohol , pan masala then quitting them is extremely essential .
To the extent possible escape from excessive mental tension and take rest as much as possible .
Eat food slowly after chewing it properly and the food to be eaten in two times should be taken four - five times .
Any such type of food because of which the pain and discomfort of the patient increases , do not take .
By proper food and quitting intoxication the patient will get relief from the symptoms .
Do not consider this as sufficient but the complete healing of the food is also important , because of which the symptoms do not occur again .
For this take medication by staying in the vigilance of a good doctor .
Why and how should high blood pressure be controlled ?
Today 's consumerism , tension and competitive life , wrong eating habits , lack of rest alone are the chief root of high blood pressure .
This decreases and increases day - night .
On the development of blood pressure once it can stay for the entire life without any difference .
In the world more than 60 crore people have been registered as the patients of high blood pressure .
Finally this is also considered as the reason of heart attacks .
Because of persisitent high blood pressure continuous damage reaches to brain , heart , kidneys , pancreas and reproductive organs .
Since it can not be felt continuously , but it can bring the damage which can not be corrected .
Because of maintained high blood pressure it can produce stroke in the brain .
Which is considered as the most dangerous situation .
Excessively increased blood pressure tears the weak vessels after damaging them .
Consequently there is localized bleeding .
It produces paralysis .
Similarly by increasing the pressure in blood vessels high blood pressure produces the stroke of heart .
Which creates permanent damage to the heart muscles because of which that portion becomes dead like and brings growth in the heart .
Because the above mentioned heart attack , after creating lack of oxygen in the quantity obtained through the blood to the muscles of the heart produces pain in the chest which is called enzyna .
If this resource of oxygen and blood becomes increasingly less then it would be called the stroke of heart .
When the blood pressure starts increasing then the resource of blood in the rest of the organs decreases because of the increased accumulation of blood in the heart .
The increased pressure within the heart damages the walls and the openings of the heart and produces tension .
The high blood pressure affects the activity of blood purification after contracting the blood vessels .
After its permanence the purification of blood becomes abnormal and becomes the reason of the infection of kidney and other disorders .
Since through the knidney the adverse substances for the body are removed daily post digestion through the urinary passage .
But due to abnormal activity these substances return to the body again and make the body poisonous and become the reason of kidney failure .
The increased pressure for long duration enhances the pressure in the blood vessel which take the blood to the retina and may even tear them .
Due to which the blood secretion occuring on the body may take away the eye - sight permanently .
With the increase of age the blood vessels lose the property of their flexibility after becoming stiff .
These stiff vessels are called vessel stiffness .
Due to these very arteries the high blood pressure create more dangers and make the situation extremely serious and damages heart , brain , kidney .
Due this very difficulty of artery some it also weakens the feet .
For high blood pressure control consult the related doctor and get the tests done .
In high blood pressure test lipid frofa , blood urea , blood sugar . . . . etc . are done .
After this as per the doctor advice are given as to which salt to use for food , what exercise to take , how to sleep etc. .
One should take permanent advice from his family doctor .
Do not change doctor and treatment again and again , it always takes some time in controlling .
If our weight is more than normal then we should decrease it immediately .
Do not take fried , salty or fatty food or take it minimally .
Do not eat stomach-full or again and again .
Drink more cold water this water receives additional energy from the body and increases its consumption .
Avoid non-vegetarian food and if you eat then along with it eat only fruit and green vegetable and salad three times more .
Do not take wine , tobacco , cold drinks and junk-food etc. .
Use unpeeled grains and lentils .
One must walk 5 kms everyday with speed in morning or in the evening .
One must sit at least 20 minutes for yoga and 10 minutes for meditation .
Take full massage by going to a naturopathy health center and take steam bath and anema as advised by the doctor .
Try to avoid unnecessary anxieties and tension .
Blood Donation , Great Donation , Extremely Easy .
With blood donation you can give life to some one almost dead .
With blood donation you can save family from breaking .
On blood donation you never feel even momentary weakness and you will get new agility with this .
On blood donation the body compensates for the donated blood with the formation of the new blood withing 24 hours to a week .
There is nothing to excite about blood donation .
A healthy person 's body generally has an amount of about 5 . litres of blood .
You donate only 1  20 part of it .
Only a healthy person , whose age is from 18 years to 55 years , can donate blood .
The weight of the person donating blood should not be less than 45 kgs .
Every person can donate 350 ml blood in one go without any physical damage .
With blood donation his body does not get any adverse effect .
A person who is afflicted with jaundice , malaria , sexual disease , AIDS , hemophilia , anemia , toxicity etc . is not eligible to donate blood .
As much as possible one should avoid taking the blood of a profession blood donater .
Because he is donating his blood due to his poverty , not on the basis of humanity .
His blood might lack the total elements as per the standards .
Due to frequent blood donation , such a person might be weak and afflicted with different kinds of disease , out of which some can even be deadly such as jaundice , AIDS etc .
The amount of iron in the person donating blood frequently might be much less than that of a healthy person .
Because such a person keeps on donating blood prior to the time of donating blood again due to economic compulsions .
Because of not taking nutritive food many types of diseases can occur to blood donator person .
Only when the use of blood is very essential then only blood donation should be done because on the occurrence of slight carelessness and reaction the life of the patient can go .
Because of unnecessary blood donation there is a chance of suffering from other diseases in which jaundice , AIDS , reproductive diseases etc severe fatal diseases are included .
The blood should always be used of relatives and friends , about whom you have complete knowledge .
If you have to get the surgery done on the definite date then you youself get your blood extracted before the surgery and have it kept to be used during the surgical process .
There is no danger in having the blood extracted beforehand .
In the modern times by using the various components of blood the demand for blood can be reduced .
Like the patient suffering from anemia should only be given red blood corpuscles and it is essential for the burnt person to be given plasme .
Therefore giving that category of blood which is according to the patient and is behavioural is beneficial .
My blood group is of normal category , can I donate blood ?
There are four groups of blood A . , AB and O , any type of blood bank would require the blood donators of all these types .
Nobody has ever invited me for blood donation .
You are always invited to donate blood .
There is an arrangement for it in every community .
If my age is not suitable for blood donation , in such a situation can I donate blood .
If your age is in between 18 and 55 and you are healthy then you can donte blood otherwise not .
But my weight is less .
If your weight is more than 40-45 kg then you can donate blood .
My blood has iron deficiency or I have anemia .
All the blood donors are tested for anemia and the blood of the blood donors with less than 12 . % hemoglobin is not taken .
I have the fear of weakness from blood donation .
You do not need any kind of rest or extra meal after blood donation .
You can go to work immediately after blood donation .
No difference comes in your daily life because of the blood donation .
I have a lack of time and it does not seem convenient to me .
The whole process of blood donation takes only hallf an hour while blood donation itself completes only in five minutes .
Is it safe to donate blood .
Yes  Completely safe . All the instruments are sterilised and meant for disposal after use so there is no possibility of any kind of infection .
Before getting the blood from any government or private bank , do check the reports of the following tests .
It is compulsory to carry out the tests for HIV , Hepatitis-B and C , Malaria and VDRL before blood donation .
Learn the difference between cholestrol and fat .
Fat can alone increase your weight but cholestrol alone can not increase your weight .
In 9 out of 10 people the reason behind obesity is the presence of both the fat and the cholestrol .
When the cholestrol is in the body in normal quantity then it plays an important role in keeping the artries of the heart healthy .
It is very important for health that the cholestrol be in normal quantity .
It is produced in the liver of our body by the nature .
If there is too much cholestrol in the body then it leads to the disease ` Aeksklerosis ' .
In the ` Aeksklerosis ' disease . wax-like substance is secreted in the artries which makes them very narrow .
Due to this wax-like substance blood is not able to flow properly which leads to heart attack .
HDL cholestrol is a high density lipoprotein .
Its job is to clear the way of the blood flow such that the work of the heart mechanism goes on smoothly .
We can call HDL cholestrol the good cholestrol .
LDL cholestrol is a low density lipoprotein .
LDL cholestrol accumulates in the artries by combining with the fat which causes obstacle in the flow of the blood .
Due to the obstacle in the blood flow , there is a danger of heart disease .
We can call LDL cholestrol the bad cholestrol .
Vegetable fat is unsaturated lipid .
Because of vegetable ghee and the process of organic hydrogenation , vegetable oil takes the solid form in the room temperature .
Vegetable fat is not so harmful as saturated fat .
As far as obesity is concerned both kinds of fat increases obesity .
Animal fat the fat found in all kinds of meat and milk products comes under this category .
Animal fat is saturated fat , which means that it becomes solid from liquid at room temperature . It increases the fat cells of our body which leads to increase in the weight .
Animal fat , along with the bad cholestrol , reduces the blood flow towards the mind and the heart .
If you want to remain healthy then before having your food first see how much is the quantity of the cholestrol and the fat .
Endocrine glands have a very important place in our body .
When endocrine glands secrete in enough quantity then our helath remains perfect but in case of the opposite our health malfunctions hence it is compulsory for us to keep them healthy under any condition .
Because of these endocrine glands someone is found to be extremely small , some tall , some fat and some absolutely thin .
Eunuchs are also the result of the abnormality of these endocrine glands .
Sometimes you would have seen hairs on the face of the girls and boys without moustache and beards and would have heard of sex change all this is the result of the abnormality of the endocrine glands .
It is clear from all this that secretion of the endocrine glands keep a balance on our mental development , internal and external activities and behavior etc. .
The hormone secreting from the pancreat gland is insulin .
Pancreat gland keeps a control over the quantity of insulin .
When the body has excessive glucose then the secretion of insulin converts into glucose and due to the lack of insulin diabetes occurs .
Thyroid glands are of the shape of the shield and they are situated in the throat on the both sides of the trachea .
The hormone secreted from thyroid glands is called thyroxin and it controls the growth of the body and the rate of the heart beat .
It is helpful in proper usage of carbohydrate .
In case of deficiency of glucose in the body the secretion of thyroxin helps in the formation of glucose by separating carbohydarte from other substances and controls the quantity of calcium .
In case of throxin becoming over-active phosphate along with calcium is lost from the bone and it begins to come in excretion and consequently the bones become thin and weak .
Parathroids are four in number and they are situated attached to the throid glands .
The hormone secreted in it helps in keeping the optimum quantity of calcium and phosphate in the blood .
Its deficiency lead to tetanus , calcium deficiency and increase in phosphorous .
The secretion of liver and stomach removes the deficiency of blood .
The secretion of liver and stomach increases the red blood cells in the blood .
Adrenal gland is also called suprarenal gland it is near the kidneys .
Every gland has two parts .
The outer part is called adrenal cortex and the inner part is called adrenal almedula .
The secretion of the outer part of the bordering kidney has a great importance .
The removal of outer part by operation causes immediate death .
The outer part is essential for life .
The sexual feelings are balanced by these hormones .
Due to more secretion than required untimely sexual development takes place .
For example periods and complete development of sexual organs in 2-4 years old girls .
Testes in the males and ovaries in the females are present in the form of sexual glands .
We call the juice secreted by these sex glands the sex hormone and it is this which gives maleness to the males and femaleness to the females .
Pituitary gland is the part of the brain itself and it is very small in size .
Several types of hormones are produced by the pituitary gland .
It is because of these hormones that the hormones secreted by the rest of the glands is produced in the right quantity and their work is completely controlled .
It is very necessary for the normal development .
When these hormones do not work properly then even the giant-sized children could also be born .
These hormones are very helpful in removing the dwarfism .
The elements that develops then is produced in the front part of the pituitary gland .
The secretion of these glands is chemical and their work is also to produce chemical effect .
Taking bath in cold water leads to the formation and the secretion of hormones within the body on time and in proper form .
When these glands get live food then they do their work properly .
Use of fresh pure cold water is helpful in their secretion .
Therefore in order to improve the chemical work of these glands , we should take the complete chemical elements obtained by unripe food whether you take it in the form of water by taking the juice or just the unripe food in itself .
Because of the use of cold water the glands secrete properly by becoming strong and fired up .
The property of unripe food is also cold and that of acidic ripe potato hot .
Therefore unripe food is necessary for the proper development and secretion of these glands .
Besides these endocrine glands , dineal gland and thymous gland also have an important place .
Sufficient secretion by Pineal gland leads to proper secretion and development of sexual glands and it is also helpful in the mental development .
Because of the proper secretion of thymous gland , sexual maturity comes on time .
It is necessary to know about the deficiency signs of the endocrine glands so that the related glands could be fired up .
When absorption and release process of carbohydrate could not take place completely due to the deficiency of insulin then diabetes occurs .
In case of deficiency of thyroxin , along with obesity and goitre , the absorption of iron could not take place sufficently .
In case of deficiency of secretion by the sexual gland , there is a lack of maleness and femaleness .
In case of deficiency of secretion by pituitary gland , alongwith dwarfism , strength also diminishes and complete inaction could even lead to death .
In case of deficiency of secretion by pineal gland , there is an untimely development of sexual maturity and there is an improper mental development .
In case of deficiency of secretion by thymous gland the development of sexual organs is not proper and complete .
In case of deficiency of secretion by the adrenal gland , the life force diminishes and in complete inaction could even lead to death .
In this way the proper understanding of the indications caused by the deficiency of secretion is very helpful in removing the deficiency .
Cytica is a disease of nerves .
In the inner portion of the body , cytica nerve is a long nerve in comparison to the others .
Coming out of the lower end of the spine , it has gone towards the leg from behind the ankles .
The pain which it causes is called cytica .
This pain originates at the back and sometimes spread till the toe of the leg .
But generally the pain is caused by the part of this very nerve .
It is always limited at the back side .
The pain of cytica is very painful and it can be compared to the pain of the toothache .
This disease generally remains from several weeks to several months and in difficult circumstances it can carry on till several years .
Cytica occurs due to cold , residence in damp place , paralysis of the muscles and constipation etc. .
When due to these reasons the blood flow becomes poisonous and the cytica nerve becomes agitated by this poison and swelling appears in it then this disease appears .
Therefore in many areas cytica is called a kind of neuritis .
Sometimes as a result of an injury to the lower portion of the spine the cytic nerve is affected causing this disease .
It is said that this condition arises by standing or walking for a long time , bending suddendly , picking up heavy weight etc. .
In cytica disease it is extremely important to make the patient healthy along with the local treatment .
For this it is specially important to pay attention towards the methodology .
But now because of the emergence of different diseases and allergies by the use of artificial resources , people have begun to give importance to the natural alternative .
It is necessary to give special attention towards the formation of acid-accumulation in the patient 's body .
In many situations this disease appears bcause of the decrease in acid .
If one can fast one day before the treatment then the patient is sufficiently benefitted .
In all the old diseases one should fast in some form .
The body gets cleansed by fasting .
Other dietary methods are similar to mental weakness .
How natural are the beauty products .
Nature is not just the beauty source but also a big source of beauty products .
We get such natural things from it which increases the beauty of our skin and hair as well as eliminates their diseases .
Our body has the wonderful capacity to absorb the beneficial effects of these herbs .
Their speciality is that they do not have any negative or harmful effects on the body .
India 's famous and internationally recognized beauty specialist Shahnaz Hussain believes that ` Ako prepared by the vegetation and herbs has a very important place in the area of beauty industry .
They along with keeping the skin clean also nourishes them .
It increase the blood flow and brings glow to the skin .
It also makes the skin free of diseases .
Today beauty products made of artificial chemicals in the form of beauty materials is quite popular .
In the cities and towns artificial face cream , shampoo , remover , hair oil etc are used in abundance .
But due to the emergence of different diseases and allergies people have now begun to give importance to the natural alternative .
A lot of beauty products are now being sold in the market in the name of ` natural ' .
Are they really natural .
Generally this question is a mystery for the consumers .
If we take a look at the advertisements then it is so that in the name of ` natural ' and ` herbal ' mostly chemical products are being sold .
Generally instead of taking the ready made herbal or natural beauty products available in the market if we prepare it in the home in consultation with a qualified herbal specialist then it is better .
Although in the busy life this is definitely a little difficult for every woman or man yet it is the best .
Some dependable herbal beauty products could be used .
The herbal products of the famous beauty specialist Shahanaz Hussain is also becoming quite popular now a days .
Among these products like Shazema , Shalife , Shasilk , Shaleshm , Shabright , Shaclean , Shamlo , Shataj , etc are quite popular .
For hair specially Shaneem , Shacare , Shahair , Shahina , Shatone , Shamla etc are famous .
Even Shahnaz Hussain does not give guarantee about her products .
She says that the way there is a reaction on the skin by the use of artifical products , in the same way there could be a harmful reaction from the products made up of herbs .
So the guarnatee of the color and oneness of the products in every batch can not be given .
But there is no reduction in the effectiveness of the products because of our dependence on the nature .
It is also good to forget .
In the lives of all of us there are many moments worth forgetting .
It would have happened with you that some name might have been there in your mind but that does not come to your tongue .
Sometime you forget after keeping the keys somewhere .
It is believed by the zoologists that even behind this incomplete memory of the humans also there is a motive .
Some people are unwavering in their belief that if we want a permanent impression of knowledge then it is necessary that our memory be incomplete .
If we could remember everything at the conscious level then we would go crazy .
Everything would have gone awry by the memory of smaller events , therefore it is good that we remember only the important things .
Healthy mind exists in a healthy body .
If your age is more than forty years and exercise four or five times a week then surely you could beat in memory that person of your age who do not exercise .
If you do not exercise regularly then leave your laziness now .
The wonderful tonic for the mind is the exercise .
It improves the flow of blood to the brain .
Our memory increases automatically .
Solving crosswords , puzzles and playing games like chess and cards sharpens your memory .
These games benefit slowly and at micro level now it depends on you which game you like .
Write all the things to remember briefly on a piece of paper .
This way this information will go into your memory .
With this your mind becomes free to memorise other things .
The storage of your memory is limited .
It will not be pressurized a lot if the list is made .
Whatever happens is not completely independent from the other events .
Pay attention to these events .
Very easily the description of any particular event will begin to flash in the mind .
If the mind does not co-operate , even then such facts could be searched in any book of general knowledge .
By combining the events sequentially in this way many times our mind begins to think in the right direction .
The creation of anger takes place in the destructive part of our mind .
In today 's time a lot of our problems arise because of the anger .
The result of anger is protest , destructive and violent behavior .
Anger particulary these days is appearing in our daily life .
I said my son to switch off the T . . and study then he became angry .
The wife wanted to go to the market for shopping but due to the rejection by the husband she immediately expresses anger .
I am standing in a bank , waiting for my turn , due to the delay because of the staff 's talking here and there I become angry .
I expect some personal favor from my friend but due to his refusal I stop talking to him out of anger .
I want to sleep but on being disturbed by my brother . give him a sound slap .
The husband laughs after listening to the views expressed by the wife , wife becomes angry and the fighting begins .
Somebody criticises or insults me . immediately retalliate .
The reason behind most of the fights and divorce of the married people is anger .
Have you ever thought what is the reason behind this excessive anger in life .
The reason behind anger is stress .
When the stress increases then it reduces and minimises our endurance capacity .
The power to understand the things and situations logically reduces .
Anger appears immediately .
Some people whose nature is to always get angry they are called the people of Type A. .
During anger our body produces a lot of adrenalin hormone and neurotransmittors .
Heart attack happens because of the anger .
It increases the blood pressure and the possibility of heart attack increases .
For many people the enemies are the other people .
Anger is your biggest enemy which is hiding inside you .
Control it before it controls you .
Anger is a normal process .
When the anger becomes destructive then it becomes the reason behind many problems .
The way invention of Ayurveda medicine happened in India the same way development of Unani medicine took place in Arab .
Whether these problems are in your work , personal relationship or in your lifestyle .
But some experts are of the opinion that Unani medicine also began from the Ayurveda medicine because like Ayurveda medicine in Unani medicine also there is use of medicinal herbs and roots .
Sooner or later all people from any age group , sex and the elderly suffer from fever .
According to Unani physicians fever is not a disease but is a symptom of other diseases .
In fever temperature of patient ' s body increases .
Sweating occurs on increase of temperature and fever ends .
According to Unani physicians by being victim to fever dirt of body comes out through sweat .
If man does not get fever then all the dirt can give rise to more sicknesses staying inside the body .
Phlegmatic fever happens more to little children and the elderly .
According to Unani medical experts if phlegmatic fever occurs inside the body due to some problem then we call it ' laska ' or ' aesthenic fever ' in allopathy .
According to Unani physicians phlegmatic fever occurs due to the violent outbreak of flu .
On getting a cold by roaming outside for long time in a cold environment in the winters phlegm in body starts getting infected .
Phlegmatic fever ends by anointing fever - nut seeds on forehead and hands and legs on grinding with water .
Taking 6 masha each of all things dry ginger , chilli , sacred fig , cobra saffron , kutki , indra jau grinding a bit , boiling in water make a decoction .
Then by drinking the decoction morning and evening on filtering phlegmatic fever ends .
Taking 1 tola indigenous parsley put in a clay pot filling it with water .
Keep that parsley soaked till eight o ' clock .
Getting up next day in the morning phlegmatic fever gets cleansed out by drinking from above on taking strained water  julal  mixing with 2 tola of sorbete banfasha .
On drinking morning and evening 3 masha safflower seeds . masha fennel seeds . pieces of raisins  seedless  , taking out molasses of raisins . tola of arq makoy , taking 6 tola arq fennel seeds , mixing 4 tola of yeast , banfasha , warming up a little , phlegmatic fever gets destroyed .
Bile stays accumulated in gall bladder of body and participates in the digestion of food .
Bile also destroys the harmful bacteria that cause harm to body .
But if bile itself becomes infected meaning defected for a certain reason then produces various diseases in the body .
There is production of biliary fever by disorder of bile .
Unani physicians have told of biliary fever being of various types according to disorder of bile .
When bile in the bile vessels gets infected then there is production of fever after one day .
In such a condition we call biliary fever ' gib lazim ' .
When bile in vessels around the stomach gets infected then we call biliary fever ' tap mohrika ' .
On bile getting infected outside the vessels we call biliary fever ' gib daira ' .
When only bile is infected then we call biliary fever ' gib khalis ' .
On occurrence of disorder of cough and bile together we call it ' gib gair khalis ' .
Patient of biliary fever should abstain from spicy , sour food substances and made from jaggery .
Drinking tea , coffee causes lot of harm in biliary fever .
Biliary fever disorder also increases by eating potatoes , colocasia , black lentils and eggs .
Patient afflicted with biliary fever should also consume less milk .
Patient afflicted with biliary fever should also not eat meat .
Consumption of cool food substances causes benefit in biliary fever .
You can feed grape , apple , pear , orange , etc to patient of biliary fever .
Limca  soda water of lime  also causes benefit in biliary fever .
You can also give tapioca porridge  kheer to the patient of biliary fever .
You can also feed spinach , zucchini , kulfa and bottle gourd to patient of biliary fever .
In fever azamiya patient first feels body ache then gets fever from getting a strong cold .
Patient gets such strong shivers that even by covering with two to three blankets outburst of cold does not reduce .
The biggest identification of fever azamiya meaning malaria fever is the production of fever by cold .
Patient gets the fever of malaria after a gap of one day .
Patient feels lot of weakness after fever has subsided .
In the modern environment much consumption of alcohol produces heart diseases .
Vazulkalb disease happens a lot because of other diseases .
In jayabitus maximum people become victims to heart diseases because of their carelessness .
Defect of kidneys can also produce vazulkalb disease .
In vazulkalb there is sudden production of pain and pain is so acute that patient can reach the edge of unconsciousness struggling in pain .
Patient of vazulkalb tries to hold his heart tightly .
Heart pain is such as if someone if tightening heart in a spiky iron trap .
On occurrence of acute pain in vazulkalb you should give pain killer .
Only on giving a pain killer can you save a patient of vazulkalb from the danger of death .
After that knowing the cause of origin of vazulkalb you should treat it .
During heartache you should keep patient in open air so that he is able to get enough clean and fresh air  Oxygen  for breathing .
Patient has more heartache because of constipation therefore you should give medicine to stop formation of constipation .
Patient should himself take such light and easily digestible food by which disorder of constipation does not occur .
During the stroke of pain of heart you should make the patient lie down on bed and remove clothing from his chest .
You should fan him and open doors and windows .
In Unani medicine there is a description of massage of rose essence on the spot of pain .
By feeding the patient khamira gavzaban ambari jawahar wala in amount of 5 masha weakness of heart gets destroyed .
On taking 5 masha arq khamira with gavzaban or water there is much benefit to the heart .
By consuming 7 masha of majun falsafa , mixing 6 masha each of arq fennel seeds and arq makoy during morning heart gets a lot of energy .
Weakness of heart gets destroyed by consuming jawahar mohra in 2 rice quantity with 5 masha of khamira gavzaban jawahar wala .
By eating 3 ratti of aksir khafkan mixing with 6 masha of khamira gavzaban and by drinking cow milk on top there is protection from heart ache by destruction of weakness of heart .
There is immense relief by consuming gulkand sevti in 2 tola quantity , 10 tola arq gavzaban and with 5 tola arq bedmushq on occurrence of rapid heart beat due to heat .
There is harmful effect on heart because of various infectious diseases by increase of physical weakness .
By much flow of blood because of some accident and by deficiency of blood in the body because of some long disease a lot of harm is caused to the heart .
On occurrence of blood deficiency heart is unable to work with full vigor due to low blood pressure .
Because of the blood not being able to reach the brain in enough quantity patient ' s head starts reeling .
While walking or during work you start feeling faint .
Unani medicine has considered constipation to be the root of all diseases of stomach .
By not eating on time , by consuming much fatty , heavy and cold food substances , by not doing any physical work at all and oversleeping , resting too much in bed when there is production of constipation .
Only after destroying constipation on obliterating diseases of liver you can get freedom from jofulkalb .
In Unani medicine it is addressed by various names in Arabic keeping in mind state of asthma .
Taking 2 tola of oil , mixing 1 tola white wax and fat of goat liver in it , by massaging on the chest on warming it , effect of stroke gets destroyed .
There is relief in breathing by this massage .
Disease of asthma gets very weak by physical form .
For its energy boost you should give 5 masha khamira abresham sheera unnab wala or abresham hakim irshadwala in quantity of 5 masha in 12 tola arq gavzaban with sorbet fariyad ras .
There is lot of benefit by sucking at a pill of habb jeekunnfas 1 pill in the morning and 1 pill at night keeping it in mouth .
Often by consuming 1 to 5 jikunnfas  on consultation with the physician  everyday with water there is a lot of benefit in breathing disease  asthma  .
According to Unani therapists the children who eat very sweet things since childhood and who do not do physical exercise on getting fat fall prey to jayabitus disease  diabetes  .
Those who eat hot substances and those who do more mental exercises are also patients of jayabitus  diabetes  therefore writers , professors and those who do mental work become patients of jayabitus .
Jayabitus disease occurs very rapidly because of obesity .
By having overly nutritious food , eating sweets and sleeping in the daytime production of jayabitus definitely happens .
Unani therapists also call more sex as be the cause of production of jayabitus .
According to allopathy on pancreas getting defected when digestion of proteins and fats is not possible because insulin not being produced then sugar without getting digested starts getting out through urine .
In Unani medicine jayabitus has been told of two types .
In jayabitus patients feels very thirsty .
In jayabitus patient gets urge to urinate more .
Patient of jayabitus has to get up a number of times at night .
Ants crowd on urine of patient of jayabitus very fast .
There are many such medicines in Unani medicine that bring a lot of benefit to patient in jayabitus disease .
Along with eating it is necessary for the patient to maintain moderation in his food habits .
Give atarifal mulayyin with 1 masha tartar to get rid of constipation to the patient at night while sleeping .
By eating arq jayabtus with 10 tola sorbet anar  pomegranate the expulsion of sugar in urine stops .
Kurs tabasheer medicine also causes a lot of benefit to the patient of jayabitus .
You can buy kurs tabasheer medicine from the chemist .
To make at home taking rose flowers , bamboo camphor , seeds of prickly wild lettuce , kulfa seeds , Armenian bole , carnation keep all things making a powder pounding and grinding .
Make pill on mixing this powder in a mortar with tartar .
There is a lot of benefit by consuming 5 masha pills with 12 tola arq gavzaban .
Make a powder drying and mixing in equal amounts the inside peel of sycamore and seed of java plum in shade .
There is a lot of benefit in diabetes disease by eating 3 masha powder with raw sugar .
By consuming 7 masha jayabitus powder with 10 masha curd water morning and evening there is control on sugar in diabetes .
There is a lot of benefit in jayabitus by consuming with water 5 masha gurmar herb and seeds of java plum making powder pounding and grinding in equal amounts .
In summers on ripening of margosa fruit  nibauli by eating everyday there is a lot of benefit in diabetes .
There is also benefit by consumption of seeds of nibauli making a powder .
There is also lot of benefit by making the patient drink juice of soft leaves of margosa , juice of bitter gourd and juice of soft leaves of banana .
You can call meningitis  sarsam disease of hot mind or swelling in mind .
According to Unani physicians there is swelling in the mind or in the membranes of mind because of some reason .
Because of swelling patient of meningitis becomes uncontrollable by mind and starts speaking nonsense .
Patient of meningitis because of getting uncontrollable by mind starts babbling .
According to doctors in correspondence to swelling they consider meningitis to be of two types bacterial  hakiki and non - bacterial  gairhakiki .
We call sarsam dambi  franitus  khooni sarsam in common language and cerebrates in allopathy .
We call sarsam dambi raktaj sarsam in ayurveda .
We call sarsam safravi shadid sarsam in common language and pittaj sarsam in ayurveda .
We call it acute meningitis in allopathy medicine .
Sarsam dambi raktaj or pittaj is of two kinds .
When someone has khooni sarsam then there remains a constant fever .
In khooni sarsam disease there is a strange shuddering in the brain .
In khooni sarsam disease redness is seen on face , on tongue and in eyes of patient .
The patient of khooni sarsam sometimes laughs or sometimes cries .
In pittaj sarsam  sarsam safravi  fever is also not much and there is also a feeling of lightness in head .
In sarsam disease if a certain patient loses the control of mind due to the heat of extreme fever then a Unani doctor advises a vein cut and to apply the blood sucker by making a cut on the calf .
They talk of tying and massaging hands and feet , getting foot baths and cleansing of stomach on giving patient enema .
So they give advice to patient to smell hot or cold things and take measures that will give energy .
Sarasam varid  varam dimag sard  occurs because of cough and wind .
When patient gets sudavi sarasam from disorder of wind then patient feels very restless .
Patient of sarasam varid starts babbling because of fever .
When because of extreme outburst on throat and tongue of varid sarasam in an acute state patient is unable to say anything then there is a lot of benefit by pouring on making a decoction of gul babuna , gul banfasha , wheat bran , ikli lulmalik over head and neck .
By taking 100 grammes of green leaves of makoy , boiling in water , on straining by pouring on head there is lot of benefit in sarasam varid .
Taking rumi mastagi in 2 masha amount or else grinding 4 masha ustukhudus mixing with gulkand made from 2 tola honey and by making patient lick it there is lot of benefit in sarasam varid .
Taking 5 tola gul rogan mixing in 200 grammes arq gulab and by keeping on head and forehead a clean piece of cloth on soaking in it there is lot of benefit in sarasam saudavi .
Mixing 3 tola sorbet-e-alubukhara in 10 tola water of cottage cheese and by making patient drink there is a lot of benefit in sarasam saudavi .
3 seeds of vilayati fig , 11 seedless raisins , seeds of khatmi , gul nilufara , gul banfasha , ustukhudus , khubbazi , mulethi , badranjbuya taking all things 6 masha each , taking 11 pieces of lisaudha seeds making concoction in 10 tola gavzaban and 10 tola fennel seeds , straining , mixing 3 tolas sorbet banfasha in it and giving patient to drink there is immediate relief .
Taking 5 tola natrun . tola each of everything mint , akarkara , hasha , namam . masha jundbedastar grinding with hot water mixing with vinegar of onion  sirkae ansal  and oil of jaitun and by applying salve on head and forehead disorder of delirium in sarasam ends .
You should make use of it in balgami sarasam .
Taking 1 tola niloufar . tola banfasha . tola marz josh adding to it taking 5 tola each of leaves of green rehan , mint leaves , green leaves of soa . tola gul babuna . tola iklilul malik . tola mulheti and 1 tola bandranj buya , grinding everything a bit make a decoction on boiling in water .
There is lot of benefit in sarasam balgami by pouring this decoction over head or keeping on forehead a bandage on soaking in it .
There is lot of benefit in sarasam harr by dropping in nose drop by drop sandalwood and kapur grinding with water mixing in juice of kahu leaves and on straining through a cloth .
Ancient Unani medical experts have told of malikholia  unmad  as a kind of frenzy .
In case of this frenzy patient looks kind of mad lost in some madness .
Disorder of madness has been called ' unmad ' in ayurveda .
Malikholia is called ' insanity ' in allopathy .
Patient of malikholia stays quiet , silent while patient of insanity appears a bit excited and mischievous .
In malikholia patient ' s reasoning power is destroyed and patient starts appearing mad .
There can be many reasons of production of malikholia .
Because of the shock many men and women become victims of malikholia on occurrence of nuksane azim meaning extreme loss in some job , suddenly getting insulted amongst people around you and by death of someone close .
This way people victims to malikholia lose their reasoning power .
According to Unani physicians by having a diet against nature , staying much stressed , remaining deep in grief and by getting a deep wound in head there can be occurrence of malikholia disease .
In women disorders of menstruation having an adverse effect on brain make them victims of malikholia .
In the beginning of malikholia patient starts getting suspicious .
Malikholia patient starts expressing suspicion in everything .
While doing something , going to and coming from anywhere malikholia patient starts getting scared .
On climbing down stairs , entering a dark room and remaining alone in the room person afflicted with malikholia starts screaming .
Patient of malikholia suddenly talks loudly or starts laughing loudly .
While laughing loudly they suddenly start weeping loudly .
Patients afflicted with malikholia start babbling just like that .
Sometimes it takes a lot of time in treatment of malikholia .
In such a state family of patient should patiently get the treatment .
For treatment there is complete benefit of giving medicine only by knowing cause of production of malikholia .
You should try in the beginning of the treatment that patient is able to get good sleep .
Sleep helps a lot in destroying this disease .
By making the patient drink a jam of Indian gooseberry washing with water , applying silver foil , grinding in water 3 masha dry coriander . masha seeds of kulfa and 5 seeds of plum , straining with 2 tola nilufer sorbet everyday in the evening there is a lot of benefit in malikholia .
By feeding medicines made of sarpgandha patient gets a lot of benefit in malikholia .
Make a fine powder pounding and grinding on drying small chandad  sarpgandha  in shade .
By eating two masha powder with water there is a lot of benefit in malikholia .
You can buy this medicine from the chemist by the name of ' dava ushshifa ' .
By making the patient eat 3 and a half masha yakuli shaikhurrees with 5 tola majun arq gavzaban or 5 tola arq gulab there is a lot of benefit in mania .
In epilepsy patient can get the attack while walking about , climbing up and down stairs anywhere anytime .
Patient does not have control over his mind in attack of epilepsy .
His legs start wobbling , head starts reeling and he falls down .
On falling on the ground patient of epilepsy wants to say something but voice is unable to emerge from the throat .
Patient remains smelly .
Mouth starts frothing in epilepsy .
Sara meaning epilepsy occurs more in men as compared to women .
We call sara disease apasmar in ayurveda medicine and epilepsy in allopathy .
We call epilepsy ' sara ' in Arabic .
Women get a disease ' hysteria ' similar to epilepsy .
In the attack of hysteria the fists of patient clench , teeth set on each other .
The attack of hysteria can go on for 5 . minutes or half an hour .
We consider epilepsy to have born out of mental disorder .
According to experts there can be production of epilepsy from any man or woman living in a very sad , worrisome and fear inducing environment .
There is harmful effect on brain due to worry , grief and fear .
This way by destruction of memory epilepsy occurs .
According to medical experts epilepsy can also occur from getting an injury to head or receiving a certain mental blow .
Many sexual diseases syphilis etc can also produce epilepsy .
Arthritis , pain of joints and raynaud 's disease arising from gas disorders can also make you patient of epilepsy .
In some familes epilepsy disease can also be hereditary .
On occurrence of epilepsy in parents , grandparents in family epilepsy can occur in grandchildren as well .
By feeding one pill mundi with arq everyday morning and evening there is lot of benefit in epilepsy disease .
There is use of arsenic in pill of mundi therefore definitely consult the physician .
Keep , on drying in shade , making pills of 1 ratti of jundbedastar , opium , asafoetida and camphor .
By consuming one or two pills with water everyday there is a lot of benefit .
Make a fine powder pounding and grinding on drying spargandha  small chandad  in shade .
By feeding 2 masha of this powder with water morning and evening there is a lot of benefit in epilepsy .
There are different descriptions of nazla zukam in Unani medicine .
According to Unani physicians before feeling cold or before eating cold things there is production of cold .
When patients do not pay attention to the treatment of this ordinary looking disease then this ordinary disorder turns into nazla  catarrh .
On getting nazla  catarrh once it does noy end easily .
There is very harmful effect on the brain and vision of nazla  catarrh patient .
There can be production of cold by drinking curd lassi in winter because the disease resistance power of body is unable to endure the effect of curd and you get cold .
There can be production of cold by returning home bathed in sweat in the sun , drinking extremely cold water , eating ice - cream .
By drinking cold  ice  water immediately on waking up you can get cold because while sleeping body gets suddenly cold and you get a cold .
According to allopathy medicine bacteria of cold also make other people their target on becoming airborne from talking to another patient , touching things he has touched and his coughing , sneezing .
According to Unani medicine there is production of common cold  nazle zukam by disorder of vata  sauda  , pitta  safravi  , kapha  balgam  in the body .
Since increased disorder of kapha is because of consumption of cold things outburst of cough is also seen .
On there being production of much pitta when pitta starts mixing with kapha then there is production of cold  zukam .
In cold produced by getting cold or eating much hot and cold food there is discharge of a thin secretion from nose .
Nose gets blocked again and again due to cold  zukam then patient clears his nose again and again .
An ache arises in the patient ' s head from blockage of nose .
With the cold you get from feeling cold much lethargy starts coming in the body .
There is no desire to do anything by getting cold .
There is difficulty in breathing by blockage of nose .
Patient starts getting impatient by blockage of nose .
Patient gets a lot of sneezes by getting cold .
Head gets hot and ache in head also arises by getting cold .
You feel a stiffness in hand and legs because of cold and there is also a slight fever  hararat  .
In cold by the patient sleeping on one side , nostril of that side only gets blocked .
In this way there is a lot of discomfiture to the patient of cold .
Patient of common cold  nazla zukam develops disinterest in food .
You do not get a taste of anything because of nazla zukam .
Nose can bleed on cold getting worse .
On not getting a complete treatment of zukam there can also be bronchitis , cough and asthma .
Patient can also get disorders of larynx inflammation and svar bhed  going away of voice  because of cold .
On occurrence of common cold  nazla zukam because of cold . white , viscous discharge comes out of nose .
On occurrence of common cold  nazla zukam there is an experience of pain on face .
On occurrence of common cold  nazla zukam because of heat a thin and salty discharge secretes out .
Face and eyes of patient become red because of cold .
There is a sharp burning sensation in throat and nose and you feel thirsty quickly .
According to opinions of people cold  zukam gets destroyed by itself in 3 . days .
Some people stay afflicted with common cold  nazla zukam for more than a week .
Some people get a cold again soon .
Such people stay distressed in winter and summer seasons with much cold .
From carelessness cold on worsening turns into catarrh  nazla .
In nazla discharge that secretes out of nose starts falling in the throat .
This discharge causes a lot of harm on reaching the lungs .
It is necessary to save the patient from cold air on getting common cold  nazla zukam by the effect of cold .
In such a condition it is important for the patient to also abstain from cold things .
By feeding according to disease of 3 masha to 4 masha mazun nazla with 5 tola arq gavzaban the recurrence of complaint of cold  zukam ends .
There is much benefit in disorder of throat , cough and cold  zukam by sucking at 1 pill of habb sual nazli putting in mouth .
There is very quick benefit in common cold  nazla zukam from eating a pill of this medicine tiriak nazla dayami while sleeping at night .
By eating 2 tola lauk nazli  jadid  with 12 tola mazun arq gaavzaban catarrh  nazla also gets destroyed very quickly .
It also ends the outburst of cough .
If your mind has become weak by occurrence of much cold  zukam or recurrence of cold  zukam then there is a lot of benefit by eating kushta makzan jawahrwala 2 rice bhasm with 1 tola khamira gaavzaban .
Brain gets strength from it and disorders of common cold  nazla zukam , cough get destroyed .
Cook putting everything . masha gul gavzaban . masha khubbaji seeds . masha khatmi seeds and 7 masha gul banfasha in water .
Then taking it off fire , straining , on being lukewarm mixing 2 tola sorbet banfasha and by making patient drink , zukam  cold produced due to cold or heat gets destroyed .
A kind of ordinary disorder sual  cough  that begins from problem of eating and drinking and outburst of cold can become the cause of huge diseases by a little carelessness .
Sual is a disorder that gives most difficulty to patient .
Shahika  whooping cough  distresses little children so much that afflicted children can not even sleep peacefully at night .
Allopathy medicine considers cough  sual a symptom produced because of disorder of bronchitis as cough is produced ordinarily during other diseases .
Cough  sual turns into a horrible painful disease from delay in treatment of that disease and exercise of carelessness by the patient in eating and drinking .
In the beginning of sill  tuberculosis  and jikunnfas  asthma  there is production of cough  sual .
If on getting sual once it does not end in 10 - 15 days then it becomes the identification of occurrence of sill .
According to Unani hakims cough  sual is a painful disease related to throat and lungs .
When there is production of cough  sual because of other diseases then there is no benefit in giving medicine only for the treatment of cough  sual .
Cough  sual gets destroyed only by the treatment of other diseases .
There is production of cough  sual by getting cold in winter season and by eating and drinking cold things .
In such a condition on taking medicine for protection from effect of cold cough  sual does not get destroyed .
There can be production of cough  sual by children eating sweet and sour , tangy things in the market but such a cough  sual ends on its own in a day or two .
By drinking cold water after eating things made form oil , ghee there is production of much cough .
Some people and children drink water in between while eating peanuts , pistachio , chilgoza then they become patients of cough  sual .
In such a condition there is production of cough  sual from disorder of throat .
Production of cough  sual with common cold  nazla zukam can happen ordinarily .
During cold  zukam there is production of cough  sual immediately on eating spicy things , drinking cold water .
There can be production of cold  sual in winter season only by roaming about in open air without wearing complete warm clothes .
Little children get disorder of shahika  whooping cough  because of infection from ' bolis pertussis ' bacteria .
Do not talk to any child who is a patient of shahika  whooping cough , only by using his things other children fall prey to shahika  whooping cough but this does not happen in sual  cough .
There is beginning of sual  cough in the form of a symptom in bronchitis  swelling in bronchital tube  , pneumonia , pleurisi , typhoid , etc .
So there is surely some benefit in taking medicine of sual  cough but sual  cough ends fully only on the destruction of that disease .
In any disease recurring cough is itself the biggest identification of sual  cough .
According to Unani hakims beginning of sual  cough occurs because of humors that are falling from brain towards the lungs .
In nazla zukam  common cold because of cold there is occurrence of sual  cough by much accumulation of cough in lungs .
Unani physicians have divided cough in two kinds based on dryness .
When production of sual  cough happens with nazle - zukam  common cold on getting cold then tightness begins below the bones of chest .
Cough arises violently by blockage of nasal tube through cough and by filling of cough in lungs .
In such a case force of cough reduces by expulsion of from coughing forcefully but after some time on blocking nasal passage by cough coughing begins again .
Patient has a lot of difficulty in dry cough .
Patient gets distressed coughing constantly .
Because of cough not being able to come out more coughing arises .
There is itching in the throat because of cough not being able to come out .
In dry cough pain arises in the chest of patient because of coughing .
Patient also experiences pain in waist  back  .
While sleeping at night you see the outburst of coughing more .
Some people cough more during daytime .
Taking one and half tola each of rogan banfasha and rogan kaddu , on warming mix 1 tola wax in it .
In this the outburst of coughing ends by massaging on chest of patient 1 tola juice of green coriander and 1 tola juice of kahu on mixing .
Taking 1 tola each of everything katira , gum of babul , sugar , nishasta and peeled mulheti pounding and grinding mix again thoroughly in a mortar .
When mixture starts getting dry then make pills of it the size of grams .
Keep pills in shade on drying .
Sucking at four - five pills a day destroys both types of coughing .
Keep , on making pills the size of grams taking 6 masha each of everything mulheti , root of Indian nightshade  chhoti kateri , galls  kakrasingi , peel of myrobalan  bari harad , bark of babul , kulinjan boiling in water .
Keeping two pills in mouth sucking four - five times a day destroys coughing .
If production of sual  cough occurs because of cough then taking everything . masha gul gaavzaban . pieces unnab . masha mulheti . masha gaavzaban and 2 tola sugar boiling , straining , drinking lukewarm morning and evening outburst of cough gets destroyed .
By sucking at pills of habb guldasta also there is a lot of benefit in sual  cough .
By licking and eating boiling with 2 tola honey taking 1 masha quantity each of all things , piplamool , galls  kakrasingi , shakartigal , dry ginger pounding and grinding sual  cough gets destroyed .
Putting nux vomica  kuchala in ghee boil for a long time .
When nux vomica  kuchala burns completely then grinding it keep it closed in a phial .
By eating 2 ratti medicine during morning coughing gets destroyed .
Shahika  whooping cough is the most painful disease that happens to children .
Children patients of shahika  whooping cough have sleepless nights .
Infected child if eats and drinks anything then it comes out with vomit .
The attack of cough is so strong that the face of child turns red coughing .
Tears come in eyes from coughing .
Mouth starts drooling and even breathing becomes difficult .
Seeing such a condition of patient of shahika  whooping cough people consider this disease a ' divine wrath ' .
Shahika happens a lot to children from one and a half to eight years of age .
According to Unani and Ayurveda physicians production of shahika  whooping cough happens in the form of a light cough on eating spicy things , drinking water in winter season .
But by the carelessness and indulgence of patient light cough takes the form of strong whooping cough .
According to allopathy physicians production of shahika  whooping cough  happens because of ' hemophilus pertussis ' bacteria .
Bacteria of shahika  whooping cough disorder infect you even by talking to an infected child .
On occurrence of cough in a child at home or in class many other children become patients by his coughing , sneezing and by touching his things .
There can be outburst of shahika  whooping cough by spoilt , stale food and spoilt water .
Bacteria of shahika  whooping cough stay active in winter season for a long time and make children patients .
Take 1 tola wax , one and a half tola each rogan kaddu and rogan banfasha .
Warming wax mixing rogan in it and also by mixing 1 tola each of kahu juice and coriander juice , warm it .
By rubbing this medicine on chest , waist and throat and nose of patient effect of cough reduces .
Difficulty of patient lessens on moistening of dry cough .
If some patient also gets slight fever in shahika  whooping cough then taking 2 masha bihidana . pieces of unnab . pieces of lisodha . masha gaavzaban . masha khubbaji seeds and 2 masha gul banfasha grinding a little boil in water .
Then by giving to drink little medicine with 1 tola sherbete banfasha there is a lot of benefit .
You should give this ready mixture to the patient to drink morning and evening .
Keeping soft leaves of bananas in a clay pot , make ashes by cooking on fire with mouth closed .
Whooping cough lessens by giving to lick 1 ratti ashes mixing honey .
Cutting the upper portion of peacock feather that has moon in it , keeping it in a clay pot shut the lid , coating it with fuller ' s earth heat on a strong fire of cow dung cakes .
Peacock feathers kept inside turn to ashes on pot turning red .
Now grinding these ashes mixing a little roasted suhaga and vanshlochan and by licking 1 ratti medicine twice or thrice a day on mixing honey there is much benefit in whooping cough .
It is a an efficient medicine of shahika  whooping cough .
There is a lot of benefit from fomenting slightly and massaging eucalyptus oil on chest of child patient while putting to sleep at night .
Patient of shahika  whooping cough should maintain abstinence from tomato , lemon , pomegranate , orange , etc that have a cold property and other things .
By walking bare feet on the floor on getting cold effect of shahika  whooping cough increases .
According to Unani physicians jarb  scabies is not a disease .
An acute itching starts in one - two parts of body or the whole body from occurrence of dryness and heat in blood because of other diseases or from occurrence of some other disorder .
Allopathy physicians consider the infection of sarcoptes scabies bacteria to be the production of scabies .
Scabies occurs by infection of female sarcoptes scabies bacteria .
Allergy , like scabies , also distresses the patient .
Sometimes on occurrence of scabies in some man or woman other people also become victims of it by touching and using his  her things .
In ayurveda jarb  scabies is called kandu and kachhu  kharju  .
In allopathy it is related to the names ' scabies ' and ' pruritus ' .
According to Unani physicians disorder of jarb  scabies is of two types ' dry ' and ' moist ' .
According to them from dry air dry and from excessive cough moist itching occurs .
Itching can occur due to different reasons in various parts of body .
Unani physicians consider defect in blood to be the biggest cause of jarb  scabies .
When a person consumes excessively oily , sour and hot things then there is production defect in blood from their effect .
There is production of scabies from blood defect arising from drinking and using other intoxicating things .
In women blood gets much infected by disorder of menstruation .
There is much defect in blood from hindrance in menstruation .
There is much occurrence of scabies by disorder of blood .
Everyone gets distressed by sweat in summer season .
If you do not bathe morning and evening in summer then skin pores get closed by drying up of sweat on skin .
Due to closing of pores dirt is not able to come out with sweat .
So dirt mixing in blood produces scabies on infecting the blood .
Scabies gets destroyed by bathing boiling margosa leaves in water .
There is prevention of scabies by bathing mixing dettol in water .
Patient should not bathe with soap because skin gets drier due to caustic soda .
Mix putting sulphur in milk of gigantic swallow wort in a mortar for two days on drying dry in shade making pills .
Then cook it in water putting in a pot till four o ' clock , oil will float up .
There is a lot of benefit by massaging with this oil in scabies .
It also destroys herpes .
By giving khadirarishta in 15 to 30 ml quantity mixing same amount of water to patient after meals scabies born out of blood disorder is immediately destroyed .
By destruction of blood disorder by drinking arq ushba in two or three tola quantity mixing in water there is prevention of scabies .
There is destruction of scabies by massaging on body 5 tola arq gulab mixing 1 tola juice of kagzi lime .
Scabies gets destroyed by anointing on body soft leaves of bansa grinding with 5 masha turmeric and gomutra .
By anointing leaves of mundi  globe thistle grinding in water scabies gets destroyed in a few days itself .
Some people understand the ordinary disorders of suda  headache  .
According to their opinion there can be occurrence of suda  headache by walking in much sun , doing much work of reading and writing , watching television and constipation in stomach .
Such people destroy ache on occurrence of suda meaning headache by eating anacin , pill of aspro , drinking tea right away .
According to Unani physicians by disorder of digestion when someone falls prey to constipation there he gets headache .
On occurrence of other diseases of stomach , indigestion , dyspepsia  impairment of digestion fire  , formation of gases in stomach , disorder of bile , acquiring cold , getting nazla - zukam  common cold also headache arises .
By lack of blood in body and more involvement in sex also headache occurs .
Youngsters suffer from headache a lot because of masturbation .
Unani medical experts have given description of many divergences of suda  headache .
They have given descriptions of sixteen types of suda  headache in Unani books .
In which there are eight mufrad and murakkab saziz and eight mufrad and murakkab maddi .
According to Unani physicians there is definitely a disorder of two qualities in kaifiyat araba .
My walking around in the sun or by working late staying in a hot atmosphere suda harr saziz meaning headache by heat arises .
Production of such a headache occurs sooner by sunstroke .
In summer season wind from fan also gives headache because of hot air .
By eating very hot things , drinking much tea , coffee also there is production of headache .
By anointing sandal on forehead grinding in water headache ends .
By drinking cold sorbet in headache produced from heat there is destruction of headache . By drinking on making shikanjeeb  lemonade mixing lemon juice , sugar there is a lot of abatement in headache .
Taking root of bansa in 5 tola quantity on pounding boil in water .
Then after straining , by drinking mixing , raw sugar headache produced from heat ends .
By eating majun suda everyday morning and evening in quantity of 1 tola and by drinking cow milk headache produced from heat gets destroyed .
There is quick benefit in suda harr by eating 9 masha atariphal ustukhudoos with 10 tola arq gulab .
By anointment of 6 tola leaves of green henna grinding in vinegar on forehead suda harr gets destroyed .
By giving to smell white sandal in 1 tola quantity grinding , mixing in it 2 masha kapur with arq gulab heachache produced from heat gets destroyed .
By ending heat of mind and body by walking on grass bare feet waking up before sunrise you also do not get headache .
You get freedom from headache by drinking arq gaavzaban in quantity of 7 tola on top of eating Indian gooseberry jam .
Grinding dry ginger with water or by anointing forehead and temples on abrading headache produced from cold ends .
By sniffing kapur and coriander grinding in water headache ends .
Headache also ends by anointing forehead with this mixture of kapur and coriander .
By massaging head with oil of babun headache produced from cold ends .
By eating atariphal mulayyin in quantity of 7 masha while sleeping at night there is immense benefit in kafaz headache produced from cold .
Suda nisfi or suda shahika is called half sisi meaning ache of half head in common language .
It is called ' ardhavbhedak ' in ayurveda and ' migraine ' in allopathy .
Unani physicians have told the cause of suda nisfi to be infected blood and wind of a certain part of body .
There is production of suda nisfi by much consumption of food substances that are strong , hot and contaminate the wind .
When a strong stench arises from faeces staying blocked in intestines then reaching the head it produces ache .
Infected blood also produces ache reaching vessels of head .
To end constipation you should take four pills mulayyin with 250 lukewarm milk while sleeping at night .
By eating 1 tola isabgol with water while sleeping at night constipation ends in the morning .
By taking one of the two atarifal mulayyin or atarifal zamani with boiled milk in 7 masha quantity there remains no sign of constipation .
By anointing forehead with white poste grain grinding in 1 tola arq gulab suda nisfi ends .
Patient also feels sleepy by this salve .
Migraine ends by eating 2 tola gulkand aftabi mixing 2 masha rumi mastagi early morning on production of suda nisfi by outburst of wind .
By eating 1 pill each morning and evening with arq saunf  7 tola  effect of wind and suda nisfi produced because of heat ends .
By drinking 1 tola atariphal kashniji and mixing 10 tola arq saunf suda nisfi produced by the effect of wind ends .
Migraine ends by anointing forehead , taking peel of root of castor , equal amounts of dry ginger and sandal , pounding , grinding with water used to wash sathi rice in a mortar .
On application on forehead on making salve grinding dry ginger in castor oil there is benefit in suda nisfi .
Suda nisfi ends quickly by taking 5 tola medicine atariphal fauladi with water every morning .
You can also eat medicine atariphal fauladi with 12 tola arq gaavzaban while sleeping at night .
In yarkan  jaundice disease when bile starts mixing in blood in much amount then skin of body starts becoming yellow .
In yarkan  jaundice disease you see yellowness on face and in eyes first .
Then patient ' s urine becomes yellow .
Taste of mouth of patient becomes bitter .
There is accumulation of dirt on tongue in yarkan  jaundice disease .
Some men and women suffer from constipation because of jaundice .
Patient faces a lot of difficulty while excreting by the drying of faeces and hardening of faeces .
Some patients can have loose motions in jaundice .
On production of yarkan by heat by drinking for a few days 3 tola each of juice of pomegranate , pumpkin , water melon and cucumber mixing with 4 tola sorbete bajuri disease of patient starts ending .
Making juice of green leaves of radish sour , mixing 7 tola sugar in it and by eating it yarkan starts ending .
There is a lot of benefit in yarkan by drinking honey mixing in juices of margosa , daruharidra , giloi and triphala  harad , baheda , Indian gooseberry  .
Sorbete bajuri is used with other medicines in the form of fluid vehicle .
According to physicians if one - two tola sorbete bajuri mixing in arq makoy and arq saunf  both 6  is used then disease of jaundice produced with blockage of heart ends .
Taking 7 masha kurs kafura medicine mixing essence of 10 tola roses and 2 tola sinkajbin sirka and eating morning and evening the heat and burning sensation produced due to yarkan gets destroyed .
According to Unani hakims by formation of injury from eating food substances made from much amlaras and those with much hot effect , drinking much alcohol there is disorder of swelling .
There is much harm to intestines by production of more amlaras from eating substances made from much chillies and spices .
Because of swelling in intestines production of pain is more because of constipation therefore to end swelling you should end constipation of patient first .
By ending constipation pain also ends .
Make a powder pounding and grinding carom seeds and black pepper in equal amounts .
By feeding 5 . grammes of this powder with water pain reduces .
By applying asafoetida abrading in water around navel there is relief in pain .
Making decoction of harad and dry ginger , by giving to drink mixing asafoetida and rock salt in it there is reduction in pain .
By taking 1 masha atariphal mulayyin while sleeping at night there is benefit in pain of stomach and intestines also .
By eating 2 masha majun mulayyin with hot milk at night old constipation also ends .
On occurrence of much constipation you can give to eat 1 masha makun everyday upto two - three days .
By feeding 1 tola jam of bael to the patient and by giving to drink 6 tola each of arq gaavzaban and arq gulab mixing 2 tola sorbete anar shiri there is reduction in swelling of intestines .
Pain also reduces by drinking this mixture .
From playing in mud of little children , eating things kept here and there in the house , eating soil and drinking dirty water they get tiny germs in their stomach .
There can be various kinds of germs in the stomach .
Worms  germs  that suck blood sticking in the intestines are called antrakrim  hook worm .
In allopathy we call them ' hook worm ' because they stay clutching at the intestines from hooks made on their mouths .
Worms  germs  hiding in intestines secrete toxins .
According to Unani medical experts germs of stomach are of three types .
Earthworm worms that are long and round like earthworms .
We call them ' hayat ' in Arabic and ' roundworm ' in allopathy .
Kaddu dana  pumpkin seed worms are white and flat like the shape of pumpkin seeds .
Kaddu dana  pumpkin seed worms keep sucking at blood staying stuck in the intestines with faeces .
We call them ' habbul karz ' in Arabic and ' tapeworm ' in allopathy .
Churne worms these are very small like white string .
Because of being of the shape of worms lying in vinegar it is called ' duddulkhal ' in Arabic and ' threadworm ' in allopathy .
Production of didan  worms reaches body with larva of didan and food of eggs .
Larva and eggs of germs that have come out with faeces of a certain patient reach homes sticking to vegetables that are growing in farms .
Through a patient defecating in open fields larva and eggs reach open food through flies .
On eating such contaminated things larva start growing on reaching stomach .
Didan  worms reach bodies of children with soil and polluted water .
Didan  worms can be seen often in dirty water of wells and hand pumps .
Young or small everyone becomes a victim in rainy days drinking contaminated water .
On reaching stomach larva shed their skin many times .
When they shed their skin for the fourth time on reaching intestines they have already become adults for the production of disease .
Female worm starts laying eggs in three - four weeks .
In such a situation worms spread at the speed of ' two by four ' .
Worms stuck in intestines spread toxins on defecating excreta and keep sucking at blood .
Maximum women - men become victims of these worms through the medium of fruits - vegetables and contaminated water .
Women eat ashes , soil , grave , chalk , etc in pregnancy so there is rapid decomposition in intestines by that soil .
In that decomposition of stomach worms develop with rapidity .
When women cut vegetables then because of some laziness and carelessness they don ' t wash vegetables with clean water before cutting .
So worms stick to vegetables from soil of farms .
Some worms get destroyed by cooking vegetables but nevertheless reach body safely with raw vegetables  cucumber , tomato , onion , carrot , radish , etc  eaten in form of salad .
Nobody ' s attention goes on this thing .
Through the medium of meat , fish also worms on reaching body spreading quickly make the person a patient .
By eating much sweet things worms get more aid in spreading in the stomach .
There is pain in intestines from bites by worms .
Many times worms reach the anal entrance with faeces .
When worms bite in the anus then you lose sleep .
There is a forceful itching and pain on anus from bites of worms .
Coming out of anus of women worms on reaching the vagina produce itching .
On occurrence of forceful itching injuries occur in vagina from scratching because of nails .
There is also swelling in vagina .
So on formation of pus other disorders can occur .
On rapid spreading of worms in stomach bad breath comes from mouth .
On presence of worms in stomach patient feels hungry all the time .
Even after eating a lot weakness in body of patient goes on increasing .
Patient feels giddy because of worms , there is vomit and symptoms of nervousness and restlessness appear .
Such patients chatter their teeth while sleeping at night .
Worms are a lot behind the chattering of teeth of children .
Such children should be treated immediately on detecting worms getting their stool tested .
Patients of didan  worms at times have constipation or they become victims of ishal  loose motions .
Such patients can also have diseases of kulanj  pain  , riyah amaya  afara  , suhajul amaya  swelling in intestines  .
Nature of patient becomes irritable .
Face of patient starts becoming yellow due to deficiency of blood in body .
Worms can bring a lot of harm on reaching brain with blood .
Because of excess of worms many people become victims of vazulkalb meaning heartache .
Worms produce disease malikholia  unmad  .
Disease of epilepsy can also because of worms .
Patient has a lot of complaints of giddiness and vomiting because of earthworms .
Becoming victim of blood deficiency because of didan patient also gets on the verge of death .
According to Unani hakims before giving any medicine to patient to destroy worms patient should definitely be given a little jaggery to eat .
Attracted by the juice and smell of jaggery they head towards it rapidly .
Then stay stuck to the jaggery .
So parasiticides easily expel them with stool on destroying them .
By giving garlic to eat and by giving enema to patient making decoction of garlic mixing in water on getting destroyed rapidly worms come out with stool .
By eating 25 grammes essence of soft leaves of margosa mixing honey worms get destroyed .
Taking , boiling in water , by drinking on straining 1 tola each of peel of sour pomegranate , bark of mulberry tree , all kinds of worms get destroyed .
By eating nibauli  margosa fruit on ripening on margosa tree in summer season worms get destroyed rapidly .
Making powder of seeds of nibauli by eating 2 grammes powder with water all kinds of worms get destroyed .
Boil 2 tola batk of bakain  beed tree in 8 sakora water .
When 1 sakora water remains then straining that decoction by drinking mixing jaggery all worms get destroyed in three days .
According to Unani hakims disease of vazul meda  stomach ache  occurs because of eating and drinking trouble .
By eating at the wrong time , eating wrong things vazul meda occurs .
By eating contaminated and stale things and going to sleep while eating or not doing hard work vazul meda arises .
Most pain occurs because of constipation .
When constipation remains for many days then faeces in the intestines starts decomposing .
Faeces starts hardening up and this way there is also formation of wounds in intestines .
Because of faeces there is a lot of pain in these wounds .
Because of occurrence of constipation there is formation of afara in stomach .
According to Unani physicians when a person eats much food substances that are heavy and fattening then pain arises from production of gas because of disorder in digestion .
Those who eat rice , black lentils , cauliflower , colocasia , arum colocasia , etc things complain of stomach ache because of production of gases .
In women stomach ache arises because obstruction and disorder of menstrual cycle .
Ache in stomach also by eating wrong , zesty things in the market before meals .
On occurrence of vazul meda because of constipation you should give medicine to end constipation .
Constipation ends by taking four pills of mulayyin with lukewarm water .
By eating atariphal mulayyin in quantity of 1 masha with water constipation ends .
There is also much benefit in stomach ache  amashai shool produced due to constipation .
There is much benefit in vazul meda from end of constipation by eating majun mulayyin from 1 masha to 3 masha with hot milk .
Production of karakir meda  afara  occur because of disorder of digestion process .
When you eat hot or cold , stale and fatty foods those which produce gases in stomach then by trouble in digestion process there is production of karikar meda .
We call karikar meda or nafkhul aphara in common language .
As such most people in modern environment are familiar with karakir meda in the form of disorder of gas in stomach .
By eating at the wrong time , after having a meal once eating certain things before its digestion , digestion power starts having trouble .
When people do not rectify their eating and drinking habits , eat very tangy , oily and delicious things made from garam masalas then digestion becomes weak .
In such case uncooked food remains for long in intestines and stomach then producing contaminated gas gives rise to meda .
Complaint of karakir meda occurs most in patients of constipation .
Because on occurrence of trouble of constipation there is rapid production of contaminated gas by decomposition of faeces blocked in intestines .
When there is rapid formation of gas and it does not get any way put of stomach then accumulating in stomach it forms afara .
Often there is production of karakir meda by eating much cold and much hot things .
According to Unani physicians rotten , stale and food items made of spicy oil generate more gas in the stomach .
Some people drink milk immediately on eating spicy things .
In such a condition gas starts forming in stomach rapidly .
Trouble of gas occurs a lot by eating potato , black lentils , cauliflower , colocasia .
Patient has lot of pain and restlessness in karakir meda by bloating of stomach from accumulation of gas .
There is a sound of growling from accumulation of gas in stomach .
Pain arises in waist and chest of patient .
When gas starts reaching the brain rising upwards then makes the patient very anxious .
Because of gas reaching the brain you start getting vertigo .
An acute burning sensation starts in stomach by accumulation of gas in belly .
There is acute pain in head of patient by accumulation of gas in stomach .
There is lot of benefit to patient of karadir meda by making him eat , taking 3 masha anisun . masha kusum and 5 masha fennel seeds , grinding all of it in arq saunf , mixing in 4 tola gulkand .
There is a lot of benefit to patient in nafakh  afara  by making him eat two pills of habb papita with water after meals .
Disorder of afara ends by eating 7 masha juvarish kamuni and drinking on top mixing 12 tola arq . tola khamira banfasha .
Afara does not occur by destruction of constipation from eating one and a half tola sorbete mulain with 5 tola arq gaavzaban .
Afara ends by eating payame sehat churna in half masha quantity with arq of fennel seeds after meals .
You can also use payame sehat churna with lukewarm water .
Unani physicians have told of kulanj  pain of large intestine  to be an acute and severe disease .
Production of kulanj disease in large intestine occurs particularly because of some obstacle in the curved part of large intestine .
When there is an obstacle in intestine because of some trouble then faeces on drying starts hardening .
From formation of lumps in faeces gas starts forming which is unable to come out of stomach which produces kulanj .
According to Unani physicians kulanj occurs from food that produces gas like black lentils , refined flour , cabbage , colocasia , arum colocasia and other cold things ice - cream , by drinking cold water .
There is production of kulanj by getting much drenched in rain , swimming and bathing excessively in lake and rivers .
Gas getting aggravated by much cold makes faeces dry and hard , then expulsion of faeces does not become possible .
In such a case faeces starts decomposing in intestines and occurrence of pain of kulanj arises .
By eating and drinking coarse and condensed things when there is production of much cough in body then cough also starts accumulating in intestines .
Because of all these gas produces constipation by drying faeces .
Faeces becoming dry sticks to the mucous membrane of intestines .
In such a case on exertion of pressure for excretion hard stool forms wounds in intestines .
Because of wounds in intestines acute pain arises in stomach of patient .
On occurrence of acute pain patient lies down on stomach and keeps stomach pressed with hands .
Such a patient has constipation .
Patient of constipation feels giddy and he also has vomiting .
After trying a lot a little faeces of the patient comes out .
In kulanj rihi you can feel gas moving here and there in stomach .
Pain reduces a little by movement of gas .
By staying for long it makes the patient restless .
Body of patient goes cold and pulse rate falls .
Patient can faint but he does not get a fever .
By anointing the pelvis below navel taking one tola each of pulp of bitter apple and fennel seeds , grinding them in gopitta , making them lukewarm darde - kulanj ends .
Any man or woman can have disease of khooni bawasir from trouble of digestion .
We call khooni bawasir raktarsh in ayurveda , bawasir dami in Arabic and ' piles ' in allopathy .
According to Unani physicians bawasir can be of two types .
When warts erupt on anal opening  in anus  and then they start bleeding on occurrence of swelling in those warts then it is called khooni bawasir .
Other bawasir is called ' rihul bawasir ' in Arabic .
We call it ' rihi bawasir ' in Urdu and ' badi bawasir ' in common language .
Patient has much trouble by swelling in warts in khooni bawasir .
Patient is unable to sit on a chair or sofa from swelling in warts in khooni bawasir .
Warts are very painful in khooni bawasir .
The undergarments of patient spoil from bleeding by warts getting pressed .
Patient has most difficulty during excreting .
According to Unani physicians because of excess heat and because of hot food substances blood starts flowing downwards getting infected and heavy .
Faeces stopping in intestines starts decomposing because of constipation .
Because of lack of water faeces drying up in intestines becomes hard .
In such a state faeces produces burning sensation and bad gas in stomach .
Stool becomes harder on constipation staying for many days .
Anus is there on the edge of the large intestine .
There are three bands formed inside the large intestine at a difference of one and a half fingers that assist in expelling stool out of anus .
Swelling arises inside anus by decomposition of stool .
First tiny rashes erupt in anus .
Because of swelling in anus rashes fester .
When we apply pressure to expel faeces then hard stool scores those rashes and makes it bleed .
Similar rashes erupt outside anus too .
These rashes  warts  get very painful during defecation .
On applying pressure because of constipation blood comes out of these warts .
It is necessary to destroy constipation of patient before treating khooni bawasir .
Until you end constipation there can not be complete treatment of bawasir .
To end constipation feed four tablets mulain with 250 grammes boiled milk while sleeping at night .
By feeding mulain tablets once or twice a week you get rid of constipation .
For complete treatment of khooni bawasir it is necessary for patient to abstain in food habits .
Spicy and hot things produce bawasir constipating rapidly .
There is more swelling in warts from eating these .
Bawasir rihi is called badi bawasir in common language .
We call badi bawasir ' rihul bawasir ' in Arabic .
In badi bawasir warts outside anus are absent .
Warts are not inside the anus either but there is a lot of distress like khooni bawasir .
The outburst of gas occurs again and again in badi bawasir .
Getting infected gas moves around fast in stomach .
On occurrence of a strong outburst of gas it also moves around in parts of body .
There is lot of complaint of constipation to patient in badi bawasir like in khooni bawasir .
According to Unani physicians badi bawasir occurs from retaining complaint of constipation for a long time .
Most women suffer from badi bawasir during pregnancy .
With increase of womb pressure arises on intestines .
On increase of womb digestion of stomach also starts deteriorating .
In such a case pregnant women also get badi bawasir along with constipation .
According to Unani physicians diarrhoea can also occur because of trouble in intestines and stomach .
Disease of ishal  diarrhoea occurs from worms in stomach , disorder of bile , swelling and injury in intestines , disorder in liver .
Ishal occurs by drinking contaminated water in rainy season .
Those who do not eat fruits and carrots , radishes , onions , tomatoes , cucumbers , etc washing with clean water they become victims of ishal .
Showing an experienced physician it is important to make identification of what kind of diarrhoea it is .
If patient going to toilet returns soon and he has loose motions then in such condition you can give medicine to stop motions .
On occurrence of mucus , torsion meaning diarrhoea by giving medicine to completely stop loose motions can harm the patient .
Before giving medicine of diarrhoea it is also important to know the cause of this disease .
By drinking sorbete fasla mixing 4 tola water there is benefit in water deficiency and extreme thirst due to diarrhoea .
Ishal ends by eating 6 to 8 pills of habb ishal  on consultation with physician  with water .
By eating habb ishal pill there is benefit in dysentery also .
By eating 5 to 7 masha juvarish tivraj with 5 masha taking out sheera of seeds of khus khus and kulfa there is lot of benefit in diarrhoea .
By this bloody diarrhoea also stop .
By eating two pills of habb kabiz with water diarrhoea stops in a little while only .
Grinding peel of mango in whey by anointing around navel there is much benefit in jahir  diarrhoea  .
Torsion reduces from mango and whey .
Roasting dry ginger , fennel seeds , seeds of poste in equal amounts pounding 7 masha mixing jaggery and ghee in it make pills the size of grams .
By taking these pills in fresh water diarrhoea ends .
If production of diarrhoea is occurring because of formation of knots in stomach of patient then make patient drink castor oil mixing 4 tola sugar .
After cleansing of stomach with this feed medicine of diarrhoea .
Taking 7 masha each of rose flowers , fennel seeds and gul banfasha , boiling in water , straining , taking 4 tola gulkand . tola taranjbeen khurasani . tola pulp of amaltasa , putting 6 masha almond oil jahir ends by giving to drink .
On occurrence of swelling in liver 6 masha raswat . tola each of pulp of dry makoi and amaltasa , grinding in juice of green makoi mixing 1 tola gulrogan from application of lukewarm salve on stomach there is much benefit .
By feeding 3 masha churna roasting in cow ghee with 7 masha khatmi ke luab morning and evening stiffness and torsion end .
According to Unani hakims by eating much spicy , sour meals there is production of swelling in liver .
Most harm comes to liver from drinking excessive alcohol .
By excessive consumption of food that increase bile when amount of bile in liver develops rapidly then there is growth in liver .
By use of much ghee , butter and oils also because of swelling in liver there is occurrence of izmul kabid .
You do not detect any growth of liver in the beginning , but some experienced hakims detect swelling and growth of liver by touch .
On growth of liver on the right side in the stomach you start feeling some hard heavy weight .
On seeing the liver probing it , it feels hard .
After some time slight pain arises in liver .
Along with increase of swelling in liver patient has difficulty in breathing .
Along with this , digestion process degenerates and sometimes ache in stomach , at times gas , other times trouble of constipation arises .
You can see symptoms of indigestion and indigestion by overeating in some patients .
Due to the disorder of bile you can see much waste build up on tongue .
Due to disorder of bile color of eyes begins changing to yellow .
After some time you see yellowness on face too .
On occurrence of disorder of bile fever arises in patient .
There can be complaint of cough also along with mutravrodh .
In Unani medicine keeping in mind good health of patient there is a description of taking out infected blood applying leeches in the place of liver on occurrence of much redness and burning because of swelling of liver .
But use of leeches in the swelling of liver is not beneficial for all patients .
According to Unani physicians despite destroying constipation of patient through medicines or applying enema you should give medicines that end swelling .
You should give patient diuretics  those which help expel more urine  medicines .
Some physicians refuse to give laxatives in swelling of liver .
By eating 3 masha liver medicine aksir with curd in the morning swelling of liver and hardness ends .
Weak liver gets energy from aksir liver medicine .
You can also eat aksir liver medicine in appropriate quantity everyday with buttermilk .
On occurrence of much burning sensation in liver , in a state of occurrence of burning there is much benefit on applying salve grinding a little majun in juice of green leaves of makoi from outside .
Most people get very frightened considering bers  white spots  to be white leprosy .
Patient afflicted with leprosy is looked upon with an evil eye in the society .
Considering leprosy as a communicable disease people spurn patient of leprosy , they want to stay away from him .
From such behavior of people full of inferiority complex fills the mind of patient of white spots and he tries to keep himself away from everyone .
Bers  white spot  disease like other diseases is also a disease that occurs from disorder of blood .
The various parts of body become white because of bers .
Bers can occur in man or woman anyone but girls get more scared of this disease .
On occurrence of bers disease anxiety about marriage of girls starts bothers .
On skin getting defected by white spots no man is ready to marry that girl .
This suspicion remains in the minds of people that their offspring will also suffer from bers disease .
According to medical experts child of a certain bers patient is not also afflicted with bers disease .
We call bers disease ' leukoderma ' in allopathy .
It has been described be the names of shvet kusht , shvitra , kilas , etc in ayurveda .
This disease is also addressed as phulbehri in common language .
According to Unani hakims production of bers occurs by consumption of unnatural food substances .
When a person consumes milk after eating fish then his blood gets infected and there is production of bers disease .
By consuming honey and ghee , curd and ghee , etc things together there can be production of bers .
By eating something sour on drinking milk , pickle or vinegar onions also there can be production of bers on infection of blood .
According to Unani physicians bers is a disease that deforms the skin .
Some people call white spots shvet kushta but there is no relation of kushta  leprosy  with this disease .
According to hakims production of this disease occurs because of excessive weakness of skin .
On occurrence of blood disorder when skin is unable to finish digestion of its food then there is production of white spots because of half cooked remains of that food .
Unani physicians have told white spots to be a disease of skin  dermis  .
Men and women of hot places fall more victim to white spots .
Dark people are afflicted more with this disease as compared to fair people .
According to physicians on occurrence of problem in medicine made from mercury there can be production of white spots from eating them .
Mercury is also used in sindoor  vermilion powder .
On application of sindoor  vermilion powder there remains a chance of white spots .
Disease of white spots also occurs because dye fluid has not been produced in proper manner in body .
Production of bers disease can also occur because of mazrul kajib  sujak  and atashak  syphilis  .
Production of white spots can also occur from allergy to polyester clothes and cosmetic things .
According to old books of Unani tibb disease of bers can occur because of fasade dum  defect in blood  , zoke hazam  disorder of cough  , didan  worms of stomach  .
Bers disease can also occur from unnatural food habits and mental stress .
Nowadays there can be production of bers in the form of side effects of much use of English medicines also .
In the beginning of bers disease in any part of body of diseased man or woman tiny rashes appear .
Slowly rashes go on spreading and take the form of white spots .
Mostly white spots are on face and hands .
On delaying treatment white spots spread to many places .
There is no harm to body from these white spots , its just that skin becomes ugly .
Along with this patient gets mentally very distressed .
Because of bers disease outer skin of patient gets deformed whereas inner skin stays completely healthy .
Sometimes the whole face of patient , most part of hands and legs and waist gets full of white spots .
It takes more time in the treatment of bers disease hence patient should get treatment with patient .
The sooner it takes for color of skin on getting deformed to become white the longer it takes for change in its color .
Two types of medicines are used in bers disease in Unani medicine .
One that is applied on skin and the other that is eaten through mouth .
Before application of medicine  salve , ointment  on skin some itching occurs .
Blood circulation gets faster by this medicine and skin becomes active .
White spots end from activity of skin .
From effect of medicine that is to be eaten nervous system gets active .
Medicines finish white spots on cleansing blood spreading in body mixing in blood .
Some medicines finish the white spots from the root on increasing digestion of patient giving more disease resistance capacity to body .
There is much benefit by rubbing rogan bers safed on spots lightly .
Bers also ends by making patient eat this rogan bers mixing in batasha  khand  raw sugar  .
First of all you should give laxative to patient to end constipation .
By ending constipation full effect of medicine takes place .
Constipation ends by feeding four pills of mulayyin with 250 grammes hot milk while sleeping at night twice a week .
To make medicine of kurs bers make a powder pounding and grinding taking 3 tola each of bakuchi , chita and deshi neel .
Then mix thoroughly mixing vinegar putting this powder in mortar .
When mixture starts cooling then dry in shade making pills .
White spots start ending by consuming one pill of kurs bers medicine in the morning and one pill in the evening with water .
You get great benefit by applying sithi  dregs on grinding , on white spots , everyday .
3 masha seeds of bakuchi and chakbad mixing 5 particles of yellow figs grinding with water anointing in white spots , spots end .
3 masha bone of peacock . masha turmeric and 3 masha bakuchi grinding everything separately mixing together , by applying on white spots there is great benefit .
There is great benefit by applying seeds of radish grinding in onion juice on white spots .
Grinding alum in arq of sulphur and hartal radish , applying on spots bers ends .
Taking all medicines skins of bakuchi , murdasang , gandhak , wild fig in quantity of 1 tola make powder by pounding and grinding .
There is great benefit by anointing on spots grinding in juice of ginger .
By applying nigella seeds grinding in vinegar white spots end .
Keep malakangini immersed in gomutra for three weeks .
Then there is great advantage by application of oil extracting oil out of malakangini .
You also start benefitting from applying kernel of seeds of bakuchi with tamarind taking in equal quantities and pounding and grinding , on white spots .
Majeetha , chita , margosa and geru taking all medicines in equal quantities pounding and grinding , straining , mixing in vinegar , grind in mortar .
There is much benefit on application of this medicine on white spots .
By applying bakuchi oil everyday on white spots color of skin starts changing .
Burn banana leaves by cooking them in mustard oil .
Then on straining that oil mixing murdasang in it there is much benefit by application on white spots morning and evening everyday .
Dauk asad  leprosy  is also called jujam in Arabic .
Kushtha ' in ayurveda and it is called ' leprosy ' in allopathy .
Until about 25 years before jujam was called the never ending disease .
Spreading rapidly disease destroys the fingers by dissolving because of absence of medical facilities and leaving the patient helpless .
It is considered a contemptible disease because on making patient ugly it makes flies hover over him .
In the body there is circulation of pus mixed blood from wounds .
From the fear of contagion of this discharge other people run away from patient of jujam , but on making ' leprosy communities ' in cities keeping patients there they are treated .
According to Unani medicine production of daul asad or jujam occurs because of atashaka  syphilis  and majariul kabij  sujak  .
Blood becomes excessively bad by such diseases .
Jujam can be called a disease of skin deformity .
Like other skin diseases production of jujam also occurs from contamination of blood .
Physicians have told of daul asad  leprosy  to a hereditary disease .
This disease can also occur to children of men and women afflicted with leprosy .
You don ' t get leprosy in young age and don ' t see its symptoms either but immediately on crossing 35 - 40 years of age ulcers  wounds  of leprosy start erupting on skin .
Because of heat meaning rapid formation of blood bacilli  bacillus leprosy  of this disease are unable to produce ulcers on spreading rapidly therefore leprosy starts erupting in people approaching old age .
The production of this disease can also occur from having sex with men and women diseased with leprosy .
After many months and sometimes many years of arrival of bacillus of daul asad in body there is production of ulcer on skin .
Before emergence of these symptoms some patients sweat a lot and some patients do not at all .
In symptoms of leprosy itching arises in body and on excessive itching sort of ulcers form .
You can start see spots of swelling in body of patient .
Smooth discharge from ears and nose starts coming out excessively .
Small ulcers also enlarge on spreading .
From excessively contaminated blood of patient of daul asad wounds start becoming septic .
Slight fever also arises in patient of daul asad .
Sometimes nose also starts bleeding .
Boils of all sizes form on skin .
Patient starts getting trouble of a slithering sensation and burning .
Skin of patient of daul asad starts appearing dry , coarse and kind of peeling .
Hair of eyebrows of patient of daul asad get destroyed .
There is no pain in the wounds of jujam .
On the decomposition of wounds of jujam blood mixed with pus comes out .
Face gets deformed because of daul asad .
On occurrence of leprosy ulcer in nose , nose wastes away on decomposing .
Similar wounds also occur on hands and legs and hips .
Many times on occurrence of wounds on eyes patient goes blind .
Patient of leprosy becomes physically very weak .
On drying in shade , grinding and pounding , straining it , keep bark of hingot after making It is powder .
On eating 1 tola powder of skin of hingot during morning , by drinking water , blood defect ends .
There is benefit in leprosy by eating this powder of skin of hingot .
There is great benefit to patient from washing ulcers with dettol mixed water or boiled and trained water mixed with margosa leaves .
Taking all medicinal plant , skin of Kabuli harad , pittapapda and brahmadandi in equal amounts make a powder pounding and grinding .
Keep 2 tola powder added to half pav water at night .
On waking up in morning mashing the mixture a little drinking on straining there is great benefit in jujam .
Keep , on making powder pounding and grinding wood of vijaysar tree .
Keep one and a half tola powder added to water everyday .
By drinking mixture of vijaysar on waking up in the morning leprosy starts ending .
Patient should consume medicine of mixture of vijaysar till 40 days .
Keep at night on adding to one pav water one and a half tola leaves of sirsa and two masha black pepper grinding a little .
By drinking the water for 40 - 45 days on mashing a little in the morning straining the water there is benefit in leprosy disease .
Taking 1 pav sawdust of shisham wood keep soaked in 3 litres water till eight o ' clock .
Waking up in the morning boil this water mixed with shisham sawdust on fire .
When half water has burnt then making 3 pav sugar syrup keep filled in a phial on straining .
By drinking mixing 6 tola sorbet jal everyday leprosy is eradicated from destruction of disorder of blood .
Taking 7 masha of everything chirayta , sarfoka , mundi , black harad , red sandalwood and sahtara keep at night with 5 particles of unnab on adding to water .
There is great benefit in jujam by drinking 4 tola sorbet unnab after mixing , mashing a little , straining , waking up in the morning .
Meaning of word navasir  bhagandar  fistula in the anus  is nasur  ulcer .
Nasur  ulcer is such a boil that ends on bursting but starts inflaming again after a few days .
Nasur  ulcer is called a never ending boil .
Disease of navasir is just like this nasur .
In common language navasir is called bhagandar .
Navasir is called ' fistula ' in allopathy .
Navasir is also called ' navasir makaud ' in Arabic .
In navasir papillae develop three - four fingers upwards inside anal opening .
It appears on seeing that nerves have swollen up on emerging .
Then on inflammation of these papillae blood and pus starts coming out .
Unani medical experts have described two kinds of navasir .
Ulcer  wound  in nafiz navasir occurs too far inside .
In the state of nafiz navasir patient has much trouble and its treatment also becomes very difficult .
Some people have the idea that treatment of nafiz navasir sometimes becomes  impractical  impossible .
Because of occurrence of wounds till the intestines with dirt of faeces mixing in it disease keeps getting untreatable .
In navasir the kind of gair nafiz navasir the ulcer faces outwards and not inwards .
Treatment of gair nafiz navasir can happen easily .
According to Unani hakims jarjani and elaki the cause of production of diseases navasir and bavasir is the same .
Like khooni and rihi bavasir production of navasir also occurs from the complaint of constipation because of trouble in stomach .
First some rashes appear on anus .
Acute itching occurs in these rashes but burning sensation occurs on scratching forcefully .
According to Unani hakims on getting an injury around anus or occurrence of wound from any other cause there is disorder of navasir from swelling .
According to Unani hakims you should start treatment before swelling of sinus abscesses and production of pus in it .
Physician should make use of such medicines that do not let the sinus abscess emerge .
Taking 6 grammes each of ahifen , elua mixing 2 grammes raisins in it  seedless  there is great benefit in navasir by grinding in gomutra or betel leaves .
On occurrence of holes in navasir , wound getting deeper wounds end soon by making wick , soaking in rogan nasur and applying on wound .
Keep , on pounding and grinding in equal amounts white catechu , green majun , roasted alum and camphor  purified  .
Wounds end quickly by applying this churna on wounds or on grinding with some oil .
On applying ointment sartan there is much benefit in navasir .
You find ointment sartan ready with chemists and hakims .
Killing a scorpion , burning in 2 tola cow ghee , straining , soaking wick in this oil and on applying in navasir there is much benefit in navasir .
Keep , on making an ointment , grinding leaves of small arni , mixing thoroughly with butter dissolved in water a thousand times .
There is much benefit by applying this ointment to navasir .
Apply this ointment in deep wounds of navasir making a wick .
Make ash burning slough of snake and apply on navasir on mixing very well in it chewable tobacco and mustard oil .
By applying euphorbia and milk of awk , Indian berberry three of them together on navasir on grinding or by applying inside the wound making a wick wounds end soon .
Make decoction boiling skin of arni in water .
There is much benefit in navasir by drinking in the morning and evening on mixing a little honey in this decoction of skin of arni .
Khuruj al makassed occurs more in children .
This disease is produced more because of diarrhoea and constipation .
On little children getting khuruj al makassed their parents don ' t pay much attention .
On eyeball coming out they put it in pushing with hand but when eyeballs don ' t go inside even on pushing then becomes a cause of distress for patient .
In the age - group of 25 - 30 years like in children of 14 - 15 years of age disease of khurujul makad occurs .
Khurujul makad is called prolapse enai in allopathy because the inner part of anus comes out in this .
According to Unani physicians production of khurujul makad occurs due to kabjul amaya meaning constipation for a long time .
When people eat bad food that is sweet and sour , spicy and difficult to digest then they become victims of kabjul amaya .
On occurrence of constipation people don ' t try to end it soon and keep eating carelessly so faeces in intestines becomes dry on decomposing and produces numerous diseases of stomach .
By formation of gas in stomach suda  headache  arises .
Along with this many disorders like fasadu  decrease in appetite  , nafkhul meda  afara  , vajul fuvad  burning in liver  and vajul meda  stomach ache  surround you .
On occurrence of constipation when a patient applies a lot of pressure then anus also starts coming out with that pressure .
On getting bavasir there can be occurrence of khuruj al makassed .
When laxative is used to end constipation again and again then bands inside anus on weaken which expel intestinum rectum with faeces even with application of little pressure .
By indulgence and carelessness of treatment khuruj al makassed occurs .
Taking 1 masha each of all gulzar surkh , peel of pomegranate , green majun grinding and pounding extremely fine strain it through a cloth .
By sprinkling this on intestinum rectum there is much benefit in khurujul makad .
On applying albumen of hen eggs outside and inside anus  inserting finger  there is relief from swelling and pain .
Grinding leaves of hemp extremely fine with cow milk , applying on making a salve swelling of khurujul makad ends .
On making patient consume faulada bhasm in two rice quantity mixing in 5 masha quantity of juvarish jalinus with fresh water everyday disease of khurujul makad ends .
In the beginning patient does not detect the presence of stones in kidney at all .
When there is quite an increase in stones and reaching the urethra stops the urine from coming out then patient feels acute pain .
There is such acute pain in kidneys because of stones that patient gets desperate from the unbearable pain .
If you don ' t get a control over the pain immediately by giving medicine then patient faints because of pain .
According to Unani physicians formation of stones in kidneys and bladders occurs because of consumption of food oily , fatty and heavy food items .
Formation of stones does not happen in two - four years it takes years for its formation .
After formation also stones remain lying in kidneys for years .
When due to certain reason stones reach inside the urethra then it initiates pain .
According to allopathy physicians by excessive consumption of calcium containing food there is formation of stones .
Men and women who take out much calcium in their urine are afflicted with stones more .
Initially tiny pink particles like sand are formed that combining with each other form a hard form  stones  .
Other than kidneys formation of stones from particles of pitta can also occur in gall bladder .
Stones have also been called sikta in Unani medicine .
By stopping urine for a long time formation of stones occurs soon .
According to physicians you should expel urine immediately on occurrence of urge to urinate otherwise on delaying particles of Calcium and Phosphate mixed in urine on gathering start making stones .
On occurrence of a certain disease or disorder in kidneys metabolic particles of blood are unable to come out of body and staying inside the body start making stones quickly .
By drinking water in very less amount there is more production of stones in kidney .
According to physicians amount of urine reduces by drinking less water so particles of Calcium , Phosphate , urets of Ammonia , Oxalates of lime and other salts produce stones on remaining inside .
Because of presence of much uricamla  uric acid  in urine ashmari  stones  start forming .
On occurrence of acute pain in kidneys due to stones first of all pain should be ended by giving pain killers .
Patient should get katisnan  waist bath done if it is found from a urine test that sand - like sikta or particles of stones are coming out in his urine .
Patient should sit in tub full of lukewarm water for katisnan  waist bath .
After sitting in tub for 15 - 20 minutes if the patient urinates then expulsion of sikta takes place .
You can do katisnan  waist bath many times .
There is also benefit from making the patient drink soup of horse gram along with waist bath .
Stones also end by drinking horse gram soup everyday twice - thrice a day .
Taking 5 tola each of root of red Indian oleander and skin of root of white Indian oleander cook in 2 litres cow milk .
To coagulate this milk adding coagulant keep at night .
In the morning churning that curd eat the butter .
By eating 1 ratti butter in the morning and 1 ratti butter in the evening stones start ending .
There is expulsion of stones by taking majun akrab in amount of 4 ratti to 1 masha mixing 12 tola essence of fennel seeds and 4 tola sorbete bajuri in the morning .
By this majun stones break away and come out .
You can eat majun with water also .
Unani physicians make an efficient medicine of destroying stones of kidneys by cooking scorpions in sesame seed oil .
Burn on cooking 20 live scorpions in 1 litre sesame seed oil .
Then keep , filled in phials on straining that oil .
By dropping this oil drop by drop in urethra stones get destroyed .
Stones start getting destroyed by drinking juice of pashan bheda in the morning and evening mixing with 2 spoons of water .
By drinking on taking everything bark of varun tree , pashanbhed , gokshur and dry ginger in equal amounts making a decoction , mixing a little yavakshar in one and a half tola decoction stones get destroyed .
On occurrence of acute pain in kidneys pain ends immediately by drinking aksir , medicine for pain in kidneys which is made from guldaudi .
There is much benefit in disease of pathari from drinking juice of carrot , radish , spinach .
Sabal  jala  is a disease that brings a lot of harm to eyes .
Sabal is a word of Arabic language .
This disease is called jala in common language .
This disease of sabal is called ' pannus ' .
There is formation of a mist  web  cloudiness  on swelling of outer vessels of eyes and formation of fine branches between them .
On formation of this web  cloudiness vision weakens  reduces  and patient starts seeing blurred .
According to Unani hakims production of sabal occurs from continuous rubbing and burning due to other diseases of eyes jarbul azfan , sharmunkalib .
When blood starts accumulating in the vessels of eyes on getting infected then sabal is produced .
Sabal can also occur by falling slipping from stairs or getting struck by ball while playing .
According to Unani physicians production of sabal can also occur because of kajib  sujak  , atshak  syphilis  , etc diseases .
Before occurrence of sabal redness is visible in eyes .
Then burning sensation and pain arises in eyes .
On coming out of house of patient much distress arises because of sunlight .
Patient of sabal disease is unable to open eyes .
Patient of sabal disease has pain in eyes by sun .
After some days a kind of web  cloudiness forms over the conjunctiva .
In this disease patient is first able to see blurred and with increase of cloudiness his sight decreases much .
Unani medical experts have divided sabal into three kinds - ratab  humid  ardra  , yabis  dry  shushk  and musthamak  hard  .
On occurrence of ratab patient gets many sneezes and eyes water continuously .
In such a case patient of sabal has much pain and itching in eyes .
On occurrence of yabis eyes do not water and itching is also less , but conjunctiva becomes coarse .
Because of this kind of sabal patient can see too blurred .
Retina becomes flaccid in mustahakam .
In such a case a web  cloudiness covers the black part of eye .
Vision of patient ends .
Patient becomes unable to see .
There is a chance of great harm coming to eyes by carelessness and delay in starting treatment in any disease of eyes .
On occurrence of sabal patient should protect eyes from sun and strong light .
Patients of sabal should not come out in strong sun .
If it is very important for patient to get out of house then wear sunglasses .
You can also put a green colored cloth bandage on eyes .
Patient should make slight light in the room .
It is beneficial to the patient to keep darkness in room as much as possible .
For the treatment of sabal making an incision in the angular vein of forehead and eyes has been described in Unani medicine .
If it is not possible for a patient to do so then you can apply leech behind neck and ear .
On expulsion of infected blood sabal disease ends .
You should give julab to drive out defects .
Production of sabal in most people occurs due to roh .
To prevent occurrence of sabal patient suffering from roh should take preventives from before .
According to hakims along with sabal if a patient also has ramada  redness of eyes  then you should make use of much hot and much cold medicines .
By taking black surma , inflated yashad , both 2 tole each , jangar 3 mashe , white surma 4 mashe , ahifen 1 masha , samudrafen 4 mashe , strain them on pounding and grinding all medicines separately .
Then mixing them all make a fine surma mixing thoroughly in some mortar for many days with lemon juice .
On applying this surma everyday with a probe sabal ends .
Grind horn of stag with water and then keep , on making pills mixing thoroughly for many days in lemon juice in a mortar .
On applying this pill in eyes grinding with water sabal disease ends .
Make surma mixing thoroughly for many days droppings of cock or pigeon in juice of paper lemon in some mortar .
On applying this surma with a probe in the eyes sabal ends in a week .
Make a fine surma mixing thoroughly for many days taking equal amounts of dry ginger , alum and rock salt in a mortar .
From application of this surma morning and evening in eyes sabal ends .
Mix taking everything pounding and grinding separately 6 masha each of cloves , nail of elephant , lahori soap , green glass of bangle and 3 masha sindoor  vermilion .
Then mixing thoroughly in some mortar for many days make very fine surma .
From application of this surma with a probe at night while sleeping everyday morning and evening disease of sabal ends .
You should apply surma only after washing eyes with water , wiping with cloth .
Taking pounding a bit 7 masha leaves of henna , gurch , khus , Indian gentian  chirayata , pittapapda , leaves of margosa , Indian gooseberry , peel of harad , afatmoon make a decoction .
By drinking straining this decoction mixing 2 tola honey there is a lot of benefit .
By giving 7 masha atariphal kashneej or atariphal sagir in the evening patient of sabal has a lot of benefit .
Taking 7 seeds of khirni , sirus , 14 cloves and three and a half masha saltpetre  kalmi shora mix 7 masha turmeric in it then pounding and grinding all of it a lot , mixing in some mortar make a surma .
By application of this surma in the eyes with a probe everyday in the morning and at night ends disorder of sabal  shira jal  .
Patient suffering from some disease of eyes should absolutely not eat sour , oily , hot and spicy things .
By roaming in sun also brings considerable harm to patient .
Patient should definitely clean his eyes with clean water twice - thrice a day .
When having some eye disease patient should take light , easily digestible diet .
Should eat pumpkin , Indian round gourd , ridge gourd , green gram , goat shorwa and roti .
Patient of eyes should not take onion , garlic , yellow lentils , cowpea beans , etc .
You should prevent reading or writing and watching television of patient .
Ramada  pain of eyes  is considered such a small disease of eyes that on occurrence of ramada instead of going to the physician we make do by tying a bandage of cream of milk on eyes .
We do not pay much attention to it considering ramada a disease occuring while playing around .
In such a state some children become victims of ramada soon .
Children get other diseases of eyes also because of ramada .
When there is pain in eyes this disease is called ramada in Arabic and ' ashobachashama ' in Persian .
We call ' ophthalmia ' in allopathy and also call ' red eyes ' in common language .
In this disease swelling arises in eyeballs and mucous membrane of interior of eyelashes .
Eyes become red and pain arises in eyes .
Getting distressed with pain little children start crying .
On waking up in morning pus is out on the edges of eyes lashes .
Many times eye lashes stick from pus .
Unani physicians have described two kinds of ramada .
They have called disease of eye occurring from heat ramada and that produced from cold ' takaddur ' and ' tarabassur ' .
But some physicians have called swelling of membrane ' ramada hakiki ' whether it is produced by cold or heat .
According to famous Unani hakim Sheikh Bualisini ramada is of two types .
One ramada hakiki and other ramada majaji .
Certain other Unani hakims have told of three and four divergences of ramada .
When you sweat on roaming in sun then some drops going in eyes produce irritation .
There is burning sensation and itching in eyes by sweat .
When someone scratches with force then eyes become red .
Swelling arises in eyes by brightness of sunlight .
During teething in little children eye start paining .
Eyes start paining sooner with blood defect .
Disease of eyes occurs much by eating strong red chilly , sour things and drinking much tea and coffee , drinking alcohol .
Ramada can also occur by taking handkerchief of another patient in hand and then scratching your eyes with hands .
If you have to stay in environment of smoke for sometime then there can be production of ramada .
Smoke of petrol or diesel on roads brings much harm to eyes produces ramada from this also .
On production of ramada from cold or heat or dirty water eye become red .
On going in strong sun and light patient has pain in opening his eyes .
From reddening of eyes patient feels like dust has filled eyes .
Patient rubs his eyes then irritation arises in eyes .
Patient is unable to sleep at night having swelling in eyes .
From pus coming out in the morning eye lashes stick to each other .
Women have been called the best creation of Nature .
Because of their natural virtues women are praised everywhere .
Women are the mother and have soft nature .
Many times because of ignoring their own health and changes related to the surroundings women come under the attack of different kinds of diseases .
Women can get themselves treated easily for common diseases like headache , backache , fever etc by any doctor .
Many times woman is affected by some such sexual diseases that she feels hesitation in consulting any doctor for the treatment .
Woman affected by sexual disease , however , can consult a lady doctor for the treatment of the disease .
Because of the less number of lady doctors their service is not available everywhere .
Because of this such women face the pain of those common sexual disease for a long time which can be treated easily .
In order to achieve success in the treatment of the women sexual diseases , it is necessary that lady doctor , maid , nurse or any doctor should first of all check and test the genitals of the patient .
In order to achieve excellence and become a specialist in the disease of the women , you keep a complete record of the woman 's disease on a thick printed card which is called history sheet .
First of all you write down the previous diseases and problems  which she tells  of the woman patient who has come to you .
Writing down the problems and symptoms of the woman helps a lot in diagnosing the basic  real  reason of the disease .
For how long is this disease and problem there .
When and how did the suffering started .
In which season , by which reasons , which time or which food etc do this disease and suffering increase or decrease .
If it is possible and available then also try to know the medicines by which the disease decreases .
From the birth of the patient to her childhood , middle age and till now what all disease and problems has she faced .
Whether she has got the facility of nutritious food or not because of poverty .
What all food does the patient eat everyday .
Whether the patient walks or exercises or not .
Whether the patient has any disease from among gonorrhoea , syphilis , tuberculosis , heart related disease , nephritis etc ?
Has the patient been operated upon earlier , if yes then how many times and why and what type and which body parts , etc  .
How many children has the patient given birth to .
How many children are alive and how many have died .
Are the children born normally without any problem or operation or does she face any problem during pregnancy .
How many times has the patient become pregnant .
How many times has she faced abortion .
After how many months does the abortion take place .
Has there been post-pregnancy fever after the child birth .
Whether the womb comes to its natural state at the right time after the pregnancy or not : Etc .
Sometimes some problems in the menstruation cycle occurs in the women , which the prudent female patient use to tell to her doctor .
Sometime a difference occurs in the order of the menstruation which is called Epimenorrhea .
Sometime a change related to the decrease or increase in the quantity of blood occurs .
When the female patient complains of the symptoms of bleeding or there is some suspicion regarding such symptoms then one should confirm the bleeding at the right time .
Even a little lapse or carelessness of the doctor understanding the blood coming from vagina , urethra or anus as an irregular bleeding , instead of providing benefits to the health of the patient you can cause harm .
It can even lead to the wrong treatment .
If it becomes known that blood-loss was from uterus then its relation should be deduced from the menstruation cycle , pregnancy and during the pregnancy and abortion .
Because of the excess of bleeding , anemia could arise in the patient , which is called the second hemorhhage .
In such a situation it should also be enquired from the patient whether lumps of blood have also formed .
What has been the color of the lost blood .
Whether this color is the same as that of the blood of the period or of a different color .
It is necessary to ask all these questions from the patient .
One should note the date of the last period .
After listening to the complete description by the patient and writing it in the history sheet , one should carry out her physical examination .
Under this first of all , one should carefully look at the face and the body of the patient to see whether there is deficiency of blood .
Also examine the teeth of the patient carefully and see if there is any cavity in the teeth and if pus or blood is coming out of the gums .
Also ascertain whether her brain and muscles are weak through conversation with the patient .
One should also look at the collar bone near both the shoulders to confirm whether there is any difference between them .
Besides these , also see whether the patient has become obese because of the accumulation of excessive fat .
After this one should test the stomach and abdomen of the patient .
While testing instruct the patient that she breathe slowly with open mouth .
Then the doctor should apply the pressure softly on each part of the belly by spreading her palms and keeping the hand on the belly of the patient softly .
Before examining the lower part of the abdomen by touching , one should also grope to check whether the parts like liver , gall bladder , spleen and kidneys have become bigger or not .
Whether the patient feels any problem while touching or pressing these body parts .
Similarly one should try to find any type of pain , swelling or hardness etc near the naval and abdomen area while examing the lower part of the abdomen by touching it .
The doctor can successfully diagnose a lot of diseases by tapping the patient 's belly with the tip of her fingers while keeping the fingers standing at different parts of the belly of the patient i . . by doing the tapping action .
If there is some problem in the belly then there is a difference in the sounds of the belly on being tapped by the tip of the fingers .
In the case of flatulence and gastric . sound like that of drum comes on being tapped .
In case of the formation of a hard lump in the belly , on being tapped it seems that there is some hard object beneath .
On having contracted water filled lump the finger feels the pressure of the liquid .
In case of water formation in the belly , on being tested by the tapping method the finger feels the pressure of the water .
If the patient is pushed on the left side by the hand then the hand on the right side will clearly feel the ripple of the water .
If there is water in the belly then the position of water also changes with the change in the situation of the patient .
If the patient stands up then the lower portion of the belly becomes big by swelling because of the water coming down .
On lying on the left side , water comes on the left side .
If the patient has water filled lump in the uterus then that liquid filled lump could be easily detected by groping .
Besides these , other indications of the appearance of water in the belly of the patient could also be found .
Through this observation or test , the doctor could easily hear the heartbeat of the child in the womb of the pregnant woman by keeping his ears near the patient 's belly .
He can easily hear the heartbeat of the child in the womb of the pregnant woman by putting one end of a special stethoscope on the belly and its other end on the ears .
This instrument is called ' Photoscope ' .
The sound of the murmur of wind through the stethoscope kept on the womb in the belly is indicative of the fact that the patient has miscarried .
In the fourth month of the pregnancy , only the sound like that of the wind is heard in the womb .
The heartbeat of the child could also be heard in the belly .
Those women on whose abdomen there are thin , whitish lines then it is an indication of the fact that she has miscarried earlier also .
The place where there is pain and problem on pressing the belly , it should be ascertained which body part is beneath that place .
If this pain is somwhere near the kidney or the genitals of the woman then one should immediately try to cure the problems of the patient by paying attention to it .
The cut and sewn mark at any place on the belly of the patient is the proof of an operation .
Press the belly softly while examining the patient because if the belly is pressed forcefully this will result in the pain and problem for the patient and knotting of the muscles of the belly which will create problems in the examination .
This test is being carried out in the virgins who have their vaginal film intact and due this fingers could not be inserted inside the vagina .
The lady doctor should wash her hands with warm water and soap and dry it and again wash it with anti-bacterial lotion before carrying out this test .
Now insert your smooth finger in the anus of the girl and grapple by pressing the finger towards the front of the rectum .
You can easily grapple the neck of the womb and the womb by this test procedure .
By grappling in a similar fashion see if there is mole or lump , protuberance or swelling in the cervix .
By putting the finger in the rectum , the protuberance , lump etc of the womb can be easily inspected .
Sims speculam is a simple , light-weighted instrument made up of the stainless steel .
There are two blades  1 small and 1 big  in the sims speculam .
The girl patient 's vagina is examined by putting one blade or slab inside it .
The other dimension is held in the hand like flower vase .
Like the other instruments , while using this also the doctor needs to have continuous practice and it is important to take complete precautions .
Besides this it is also necessary to keep this sims speculam i . . genital expander instrument germ-free .
With the help of this instrument in special circumstances the woman patient is made to lie on the table for examination and her vagina and the related body parts are examined .
Due to insertion of the sims speculam in the vagina , the vaginal discharge comes out easily .
Fergusson 's speculam is also made up of stainless steel , which is a wide tube  hollow  .
In order to examine by Fergusson 's speculam , the female should be made to lie on the table such that her hip is at the edge of the table .
Tie up both the legs of the the female patient by lifting it up to the wood fixed at the edge of the table .
By this method the vagina will become wide because of the separation of the two thighs .
The head of this instrument which is to be put into the vagina is less wide and curved .
Do not forget to smoothen the Fergusson 's speculam instrument before use .
Then opening both the lips of the patient 's vagina keep on inserting the instrument slowly and carefully by moving the head of instrument in circular fashion .
After this put the bright light of the bulb into the patient 's vagina .
The light will fall on the the neck of the womb , with which the swelling of the womb 's neck , wound , cancer , etc . could be examined well .
For lady doctors . cascos or bivalve spculam ' is the most useful instrument .
That is why ' cascos or bvalve speculam ' is used widely also .
In comparison to the other speculams it could be inserted into the vagina more easily .
Utrain Sound is a simple instrument .. .
The end of the utrain sound to be inserted into the uterus is curved so that it could be easily inserted into the mouth of the uterus .
After this there is a sign on the utrial sound instrument at every 1 inch .
The length of the inside of the uterus is measured by the utrain sound and it is inspected that where is it going .